### [Defining an Application Field][api-design-defining-field]

The key question you should ask yourself before we start developing any software product, including an API, is: what problem do we solve? It should be asked four times, each time putting an emphasis on another word.

  1. *What* problem do we solve? Could we clearly outline the situation in which our hypothetical API is needed by developers?

  2. What *problem* do we solve? Are we sure that the abovementioned situation poses a problem? Does someone really want to pay (literally or figuratively) to automate a solution for this problem?

  3. What problem do *we* solve? Do we actually possess the expertise to solve the problem?

  4. What problem do we *solve*? Is it true that the solution we propose solves the problem indeed? Aren't we creating another problem instead?

So, let's imagine that we are going to develop an API for automated coffee ordering in city cafes, and let's apply the key question to it.

  1. Why would someone need an API to make a coffee? Why ordering a coffee via “human-to-human” or “human-to-machine” interfaces is inconvenient, why have a “machine-to-machine” interface?

      * Possibly, we're solving awareness and selection problems? To provide humans with full knowledge of what options they have right now and right here.
      * Possibly, we're optimizing waiting times? To save the time people waste while waiting for their beverages.
      * Possibly, we're reducing the number of errors? To help people get exactly what they wanted to order, stop losing information in imprecise conversational communication, or in dealing with unfamiliar coffee machine interfaces?

      The “why” question is the most important of all questions you must ask yourself. And not only about global project goals but also locally about every single piece of functionality. **If you can't briefly and clearly answer the question “what this entity is needed for” then it's not needed**.
  
      Here and throughout we assume, to make our example more complex and bizarre, that we are optimizing all three factors.

  2. Do the problems we outlined really exist? Do we really observe unequal coffee-machines utilization in the mornings? Do people really suffer from the inability to find nearby a toffee nut latte they long for? Do they really care about the minutes they spend in lines?

  3. Do we actually have resources to solve the problem? Do we have access to a sufficient number of coffee machines and users to ensure the system's efficiency?

  4. Finally, will we really solve a problem? How we're going to quantify the impact our API makes? 

In general, there are no simple answers to those questions. Ideally, you should start the work having all the relevant metrics measured: how much time is wasted exactly, and what numbers we're going to achieve providing we have such coffee machines density. Let us also stress that in the real world obtaining these numbers is only possible if you're entering a stable market. If you try to create something new, your only option is to rely on your intuition.

#### Why an API?

Since our book is dedicated not to software development per se, but to developing APIs, we should look at all those questions from a different angle: why does solving those problems specifically require an API, not simply a specialized software application? In terms of our fictional example, we should ask ourselves: why provide a service to developers, allowing for brewing coffee to end users, instead of just making an app?

In other words, there must be a solid reason to split two software development domains: there are vendors that provide APIs, and there are vendors that develop services for end users. Their interests are somehow different to such an extent that coupling these two roles in one entity is undesirable. We will talk about the motivation to specifically provide APIs instead of apps (or as an addition to an app) in more detail in Section III.

We should also note that you should try making an API when, and only when, your answer to question (3) is "because that's our area of expertise". Developing APIs is a sort of meta-engineering: you're writing some software to allow other vendors to develop software to solve users' problems. You must possess expertise in both domains (APIs and user products) to design your API well.

As for our speculative example, let us imagine that in the nearby future, some tectonic shift happened within the coffee brewing market. Two distinct player groups took shape: some companies provide “hardware,” i.e. coffee machines; other companies have access to customer auditory. Something like the modern-day flights market looks like: there are air companies, which actually transport passengers; and there are trip planning services where users are choosing between trip variants the system generates for them. We're aggregating hardware access to allow app vendors for ordering freshly brewed coffee.

#### What and How

After finishing all these theoretical exercises, we should proceed right to designing and developing the API, having a decent understanding of two things:
  * *what* we're doing, exactly;
  * *how* we're doing it, exactly.

In our coffee case, we are:
  * providing an API to services with a larger audience, so their users may order a cup of coffee in the most efficient and convenient manner;
  * abstracting access to coffee machines' “hardware” and developing generalized software methods to select a beverage kind and some location to make an order.
