### Strong coupling and related problems

In previous chapters we tried to outline theoretical rules and principles, and illustrate them with practical examples. However, understanding principles of change-proof API design requires practice like nothing before. An ability to anticipate future growth problems comes from a handful of grave mistakes once made. One cannot foresee everything, but can elaborate a certain technical intuition.

So in following chapters we will try to probe our study API from the previous Section, testing its robustness from every possible viewpoint, thus carrying out some ‘variational analysis’ of our interfaces. More specifically, we will apply a ‘What If?’ question to every entity, as if we are to provide a possibility to write an alternate implementation of every piece of logic.

One important remark we're stressing here is that we're talking about alternate realizations of *business* logic, not about *entity implementation* variants. APIs are being changed to make something *usable* in the first place — something missing in the original design. Just re-implementing some interfaces makes no sense to your customers.

This observation helps narrowing the scope, sparing time on varying interfaces blindly. (Actually, there is always an infinite number of such variations, and it would be a Sisyphean labor to examine all of them.) We need to understand *why* such changes might be desirable, and then we may learn *how* they are to be made.

A second important remark is that many decisions allowing for such a variability are already incorporated in our API design. Some of them, like determining readiness, we explained in previous chapters in detail; some of them are provided with no comments, so it's now time to explain the logic behind these decisions.

**NB**. In our examples the interfaces will be constructed in a manner allowing for dynamic real-time linking of different entities. In practice such integrations usually imply writing an ad hoc code at server side with accordance to specific agreements made with specific partner. But for educational purposes we will pursue more abstract and complicated ways. Dynamic real-time linking is more typical to complex program constructions like operating system APIs or embeddable libraries; giving educational examples based on such sophisticated systems would be too inconvenient.

For the beginning, let us imagine that we decided to give to our partners an opportunity to serve their own unique coffee recipes. What would be the motivation to provide this functionality?
  * maybe a partner's coffee houses chain seeks to offer their branded beverages to clients;
  * maybe a partner is building their own application with their branded assortment upon our platform.

Either way, we need to start with a recipe. What data do we need to allow adding new recipes to the system? Let us remember what contexts the ‘Recipe’ entity is linking: this entity is needed to couple a user's choice with beverage preparation rules. At first glance it looks like we need to describe a ‘Recipe’ in this exact manner:

```
// Adds new recipe
POST /v1/recipes
{
  "id",
  "product_properties": {
    "name",
    "description",
    "default_value"
    // Other properties, describing
    // a beverage to end-user
    …
  },
  "execution_properties": {
    // Program's identifier
    "program_id",
    // Program's execution parameters
    "parameters"
  }
}
```

At first glance, again, it looks like a reasonably simple interface, explicitly decomposed into abstraction levels. But let us imagine the future — what would happen with this interface when our system evolves further?

The first problem is obvious to those who read [chapter 11](#chapter-11-paragraph-20) thoroughly: product properties must be localized. That will lead us to the first change:

```
"product_properties": {
  // "l10n" is a standard abbreviation
  // for "localization"
  "l10n" : [{
    "language_code": "en", 
    "country_code": "US", 
    "name", 
    "description" 
  }, /* other languages and countries */ … ]
]
```

And here the big question arises: what should we do with the `default_volume` field? From one side, that's an objective quality measured in standardized units, and it's being passed to the program execution engine. From other side, in countries like the United States we had to specify beverage volume not like ‘300 ml’, but ‘10 fl oz’. We may propose two solutions:
  * either partners provide the corresponding number only, and we will make readable descriptions on our own behalf,
  * or partners provide both the number and all of its localized representations.

The flaw in the first option is that a partner might be willing to use the service in some new country or language — and will be unable to do so until the API supports them. The flaw in the second option is that it works with predefined volumes only, so you can't order an arbitrary volume of beverage. So the very first step we've made effectively has us trapped.

The localization flaws are not the only problem of this API. We should ask ourselves a question — *why* do we really need these `name` and `description`? They are simply non-machine-readable strings with no specific semantics. At first glance we need them to return them back in `/v1/search` method response, but that's not a proper answer: why do we really return these strings from `search`?

The correct answer lies a way beyond this specific interface. We need them *because some representation exists*. There is a UI for choosing beverage type. Probably `name` and `description` are simply two designations of the beverage type, short one (to be displayed on the search results page) and long one (to be displayed in the extended product specification block). It actually means that we are setting the requirements to the API based on some very specific design. But *what if* a partner is making their own UI for their own app? Not only two descriptions might be of no use for them, but we are also *deceiving* them. `name` is not ‘just a name’ actually, it implies some restrictions: it has recommended length, optimal to some specific UI, and it must look consistently on the search results page. Indeed, ‘our best quality™ coffee’ or ‘Invigorating Morning Freshness®’ designation would look very weird in-between ‘Cappuccino’, ‘Lungo’, and ‘Latte’.

There is also another side to this story. As UIs (both ours and partner's) tend to evolve, new visual elements will be eventually introduced. For example, a picture of a beverage, its energy value, allergen information, etc. `product_properties` will become a scrapyard for tons of optional fields, and learning how setting what field results in what effects in the UI will be an interesting quest, full of probes and mistakes.

Problems we're facing are the problems of *strong coupling*. Each time we offer an interface like described above, we're in fact prescript implementing one entity (recipe) basing on implementations of other entities (UI layout, localization rules). This approach disrespects the very basic principle of designing APIs ‘top to bottom’, because **low-level entities must not define high-level ones**. To make things worse, let us mention that revers principle is actually correct either: high-level entities must not define low-level ones, since that simply isn't their responsibility.

#### The rule of contexts

The exit from this logical labyrinth is: high-level entities must *define a context*, which other objects are to interpret. To properly design adding new recipe interface we shouldn't try find better data format; we need to understand what contexts, both explicit and implicit, exist in our subject area.

We have already found a localization context. There is some set of languages and regions we support in our API, and there are requirements — what exactly the partner must provide to make our API work in a new region. More specifically, there must be some formatting function to represent beverage volume somewhere in our API code:

```
l10n.volume.format(value, language_code, country_code)
// l10n.formatVolume('300ml', 'en', 'UK') → '300 ml'
// l10n.formatVolume('300ml', 'en', 'US') → '10 fl oz'
```

To make our API work correctly with a new language or region, the partner must either define this function or point which pre-existing implementation to use. Like this:

```
// Add a general formatting rule
// for Russian language
PUT /formatters/volume/ru
{
  "template": "{volume} мл"
}
// Add a specific formatting rule
// for Russian language in the ‘US’ region
PUT /formatters/volume/ru/US
{
  // in US we need to recalculate
  // the number, then add a postfix
  "value_preparation": {
    "action": "divide",
    "divisor": 30
  },
  "template": "{volume} ун."
}
```

**NB**: we are more than aware that such simple format isn't enough to cover real-world localization use-cases, and one either rely on existing libraries, or design a sophisticated format for such templating, which takes into account such things as grammatical cases and rules of rounding numbers up, or allow defining formatting rules in a form of function code. The example above is simplified in purely educational purposes.

Let us deal with `name` and `description` problem then. To lower the coupling levels there we need to formalize (probably just to ourselves) a ‘layout’ concept. We are asking for providing `name` and `description` not because we just need them, but for representing them in some specific user interface. This specific UI might have an identifier or a semantic name.

```
GET /v1/layouts/{layout_id}
{
  "id",
  // We would probably have lots of layouts,
  // so it's better to enable extensibility
  // from the beginning
  "kind": "recipe_search",
  // Describe every property we require
  // to have this layout rendered properly
  "properties": [{
    // Since we learned that `name`
    // is actually a title for a search
    // result snippet, it's much more
    // convenient to have explicit
    // `search_title` instead
    "field": "search_title",
    "view": {
      // Machine-readable description
      // of how this field is rendered
      "min_length": "5em",
      "max_length": "20em",
      "overflow": "ellipsis"
    }
  }, …],
  // Which fields are mandatory
  "required": [
    "search_title", 
    "search_description"
  ]
}
```

So the partner may decide, which option better suits them. They can provide mandatory fields for the standard layout:

```
PUT /v1/recipes/{id}/properties/l10n/{lang}
{
  "search_title", "search_description"
}
```

or create a layout of their own and provide data fields it requires:

```
POST /v1/layouts
{
  "properties"
}
→
{ "id", "properties" }
```

or they may ultimately design their own UI and don't use this functionality at all, defining neither layouts nor data fields.

The same technique, i.e. defining a specific entity responsible for matching a recipe and its traits for the underlying systems, might be used to detach `execution_properties` from the interface, thus allowing the partner to control how the recipe is being coupled with execution programs. Then our interface would ultimately look like:

```
POST /v1/recipes
{ "id" }
→
{ "id" }
```

This conclusion might look highly counter-intuitive, but lacking any fields in ‘Recipe’ simply tells as that this entity possesses no specific semantics of its own, and is simply an identifier of a context; a method to point out where to look for the data needed by other entities. In the real world we should implement a builder endpoint capable of creating all the related contexts with a single request:

```
POST /v1/recipe-builder
{
  "id",
  // Recipe's fixed properties
  "product_properties": {
    "default_volume",
    "l10n"
  },
  // Execution data
  "execution_properties"
  // Create all the desirable layouts
  "layouts": [{
    "id", "kind", "properties"
  }],
  // Add all the formatters needed
  "formatters": {
    "volume": [
      { "language_code", "template" },
      { "language_code", "country_code", "template" }
    ]
  },
  // Other actions needed to be done
  // to register new recipe in the system
  …
}
```

We should also note that providing a newly created entity identifier by client isn't exactly the best pattern. However, since we decided from the very beginning to keep recipe identifiers semantically meaningful, we have to live with this convention on. Obviously, we're risking getting lots of collisions on recipe naming used by different partners, so we actually need to modify this operation: either partners must always use a pair of identifiers (i.e. recipe's one plus partner's own id), or we need to introduce composite identifiers, as we recommended earlier in [Chapter 11](#chapter-11-paragraph-8).

```
POST /v1/recipes/custom
{
  // First part of the composite
  // identifier, for example,
  // the partner's own id
  "namespace": "my-coffee-company",
  // Second part of the identifier
  "id_component": "lungo-customato"
}
→
{
  "id": "my-coffee-company:lungo-customato"
}
```

Also note that this format allows us to maintain an important extensibility point: different partners might have totally isolated namespaces, or conversely share them. Furthermore, we might introduce special namespaces like ‘common’ to allow publish new recipes for everyone (and that, by the way, would allow us to organize our own backoffice to edit recipes).