### [On the Structure of This Book][intro-structure]
 
The book you're holding in your hands is dedicated to developing APIs as a separate engineering task. Though many concepts we're going to discuss apply to any type of software, our primary goal is to describe those problems and approaches to solving them that are most relevant in the context of the API subject area.

We expect that the reader possesses expertise in software engineering, so we do not provide detailed definitions and explanations of the terms that a developer should already be familiar with in our understanding. Without this knowledge, it will be rather uncomfortable to read the last section of the book (and even more so, other sections). We sincerely apologize for this but that's the only way of writing the book without tripling its size.

The book comprises the Introduction and six large sections. The first three (namely, “The API Design”, “The API Patterns”, and “The Backwards Compatibility”) are fully abstract and not bound to any concrete technology. We hope they will help those readers who seek building a systematic understanding of the API architecture in developing complex interface hierarchies. The proposed approach, as we see it, allows for designing APIs from start to finish, from a raw idea to concrete implementation.

The fourth and fifth sections are dedicated to specific technologies, namely developing HTTP APIs (in the “REST paradigm”) and SDKs (we will talk mostly of UI component libraries).

Finally, in the sixth section, which is the least technical of all, we will discuss APIs as products and focus on non-engineering aspects of the API lifecycle: doing market research, positioning the service, communicating to consumers, setting KPIs for the team, etc. We insist that the last section is equally important to both PMs and software engineers as products for developers thrive only if the product and technical teams jointly work on them.

Let's start.