### [Overview of Existing API Development Solutions][intro-api-solutions-overview]

In the first three sections of this book, we aim to discuss API design in general, not bound to any specific technology. The concepts we describe are equally applicable to, let's say, web services and operating system (OS) APIs.

Still, two main scenarios dominate the stage when we talk about API development:
  * developing client-server applications
  * developing client SDKs.

In the first case, we almost universally talk about APIs working atop the HTTP protocol. Today, the only notable examples of non-HTTP-based client-server interaction protocols are WebSocket (though it might, and frequently does, work in conjunction with HTTP) and highly specialized APIs like media streaming and broadcasting formats.

#### HTTP API

Although the technology looks homogeneous because of using the same application-level protocol, in reality, there is significant diversity regarding different approaches to realizing HTTP-based APIs.

**First**, implementations differ in terms of utilizing HTTP capabilities:
  * either the client-server interaction heavily relies on the features described in the HTTP standard (or rather standards, as the functionality is split across several different RFCs),
  * or HTTP is used as transport, and there is an additional abstraction level built upon it (i.e., the HTTP capabilities, such as the headers and status codes nomenclatures, are deliberately reduced to a bare minimum, and all the metadata is handled by the higher-level protocol).

The APIs that belong to the first category are usually denoted as “REST” or “RESTful” APIs. The second category comprises different RPC formats and some service protocols, for example, SSH.

**Second**, different HTTP APIs rely on different data formats:
  * REST APIs and some RPCs (JSON-RPC, GraphQL, etc.) use the JSON format (sometimes with some additional endpoints to transfer binary data)
  * GRPC and some specialized RPC protocols like Apache Avro utilize binary formats (such as Protocol Buffers, FlatBuffers, or Apache Avro's own format)
  * finally, some RPC protocols (notably SOAP and XML-RPC) employ the XML data format (which is considered a rather outdated practice by many developers).

All the above-mentioned technologies operate in significantly dissimilar paradigms, which give rise to rather hot “holy war” debates among software engineers. However, at the moment this book is being written we observe the choice for general-purpose APIs is reduced to the “REST API (in fact, JSON-over-HTTP) vs. GRPC vs. GraphQL” triad.

#### SDKs

The term “SDK” is not, strictly speaking, related to APIs: this is a generic term for a software toolkit. As with “REST,” however, it got some popular reading as a client framework to work with some underlying API. This might be, for example, a wrapper to a client-server API or a UI to some OS API. The major difference from the APIs we discussed in the previous paragraph is that an “SDK” is implemented for a specific programming language and platform, and its purpose is translating the abstract language-agnostic set methods (comprising a client-server or an OS API) into concrete structures specific for the programming language and the platform.

Unlike client-server APIs, such SDKs can hardly be generalized as each of them is developed for a specific language-platform pair. There are some interoperable SDKs, notably cross-platform mobile (React Native, Flutter, Xamarin) and desktop (JavaFX, QT) frameworks and some highly-specialized solutions (Unity).

Still, SDKs feature some generality in terms of *the problems they solve*, and Section V of this book will be dedicated to solving these problems of translating contexts and making UI components.