### [The API-first approach][intro-api-first-approach]

Today, more and more IT companies are recognizing the importance of the “API-first” approach, which is the paradigm of developing software with a heavy focus on APIs.

However, we must differentiate between the product concept of the API-first approach and the technical one.

The former means that the first (and sometimes the only) step in developing a service is creating an API for it, and we will discuss it in “The API Product” section of this book.

If we talk about the API-first approach in a technical sense, we mean the following: **the contract, i.e. the obligation to connect two programmable contexts, precedes the implementation and defines it**. More specifically, two rules must be respected:
  * the contract is developed and committed to in the form of a specification before the functionality is implemented
  * if it turns out that the implementation and the contract differ, the implementation is to be fixed, not the contract.

The “specification” in this context is a formal machine-readable description of the contract in one of the interface definition languages (IDL) — for example, in the form of a Swagger/OpenAPI document or a `.proto` file.

Both rules assert that partner developers' interests are given the highest priority:
  * rule \#1 allows partners to write code based on the specification without coordinating the process with the API provider
    * the possibility of auto-generating code based on the specification emerges, which might make development significantly less complex and error-prone or even automate it
    * the code might be developed without having access to the API
  * rule \#2 means partners won't need to change their implementations should some inconsistencies between the specification and the API functionality arise.

Therefore, for your API consumers, the API-first approach is a guarantee of a kind. However, it only works if the API was initially well-designed. If some irreparable flaws in the specification surface, we would have no other option but to break rule \#2.