### Terms and Notation Keys

Software development is being characterized, among other things, by an existence of many different engineering paradigms, whose adepts sometimes are quite aggressive towards other paradigms' adepts. While writing this book we are deliberately avoiding using terms like ‘method’, ‘object’, ‘function’, and so on, using a neutral term ‘entity’ instead. ‘Entity’ means some atomic functionality unit, like class, method, object, monad, prototype (underline what you think right).

For entity's components we regretfully failed to find a proper term, so we will use words ‘fields’ and ‘methods’.

Most of the examples of APIs in general will be provide in a form of JSON-over-HTTP endpoints. This is some sort of notation which, as we see it, helps to describe concepts in the most comprehensible manner. `GET /v1/orders` endpoint call could easily be replaced with `orders.get()` method call, local or remote. JSON could easily be replaced with any other data format. Meaning of assertions shouldn't change.

Let's take a look at the following example:

```
// Method description
POST /v1/bucket/{id}/some-resource
X-Idempotency-Token: <idempotency token>
{
  …
  // This is a single-line comment
  "some_parameter": "example value",
  …
}
→ 404 Not Found
Cache-Control: no-cache
{
  /* And this is
     a multiline comment */
  "error_message"
}
```

It should be read like:
  * client performs a POST-request to a `/v1/bucket/{id}/some-resource` resource, where `{id}` is to be replaced with some `bucket`'s identifier `{something}` should refer to the nearest term from the left, unless explicitly specified otherwise);
  * a specific `X-Idempotency-Token` header is added to the request alongside with standard headers (which we omit);
  * terms in angle brackets (`<idempotency token>`) describe the semantic of an entity value (field, header, parameter);
  * a specific JSON, containing a `some_parameter` field with `example value` value and some other unspecified fields (indicated by ellipsis) is being sent as a request body payload;
  * in response (marked with arrow symbol `→`) server returns a `404 Not Founds` status code; status might be omitted (treat it like `200 OK` if no status is provided);
  * response could possibly contain additional notable headers;
  * response body is a JSON comprising single `error_message` field; field value absence means that field contains exactly what you expect it should contain — some error message in this case.

Term ‘client’ here stands for an application being executed on a user's device, either native of web one. Terms ‘agent’ and ‘user agent’ are synonymous to ‘client’.

Some request and response parts might be omitted if they are irrelevant to a topic being discussed.

Simplified notation might be used to avoid redundancies, like `POST /some-resource` `{…,"some_parameter",…}` → `{ "operation_id" }`; request and response bodies might also be omitted.

We will be using expressions like ‘`POST /v1/bucket/{id}/some-resource` method’ (or simply ‘`bucket/some-resource` method’, ‘`some-resource`’ method if no other `some-resource`s are specified throughout the chapter, so there is no ambiguity) to refer to such endpoint definition.

Apart from HTTP API notation we will employ C-style pseudocode, or, to be more precise, JavaScript-like or Python-like since types are omitted. We assume such imperative structures being readable enough to skip detailed grammar explanations.