### [Terms and Notation Keys][intro-terms-notation]

Software development is characterized, among other things, by the existence of many different engineering paradigms, whose adherents are sometimes quite aggressive towards other paradigms' adherents. While writing this book, we are deliberately avoiding using terms like “method,” “object,” “function,” and so on, using the neutral term “entity” instead. “Entity” means some atomic functionality unit, like a class, method, object, monad, prototype (underline what you think is right).

As for an entity's components, we regretfully failed to find a proper term, so we will use the words “fields” and “methods.”

Most of the examples of APIs will be provided in the form of JSON-over-HTTP endpoints. This is some sort of notation that, as we see it, helps to describe concepts in the most comprehensible manner. A `GET /v1/orders` endpoint call could easily be replaced with an `orders.get()` method call, local or remote; JSON could easily be replaced with any other data format. The semantics of statements shouldn't change.

Let's take a look at the following example:

```json
// Method description
POST /v1/bucket/{id}/some-resource↵
  /{resource_id}
X-Idempotency-Token: <idempotency token>
{
  …
  // This is a single-line comment
  "some_parameter": "example value",
  …
}
→ 404 Not Found
Cache-Control: no-cache
{
  /* And this is
     a multiline comment */
  "error_reason",
  "error_message":
    "Long error message↵
     that will span several↵
     lines"
}
```

It should be read like this:
  * A client performs a `POST` request to a `/v1/bucket/{id}/some-resource` resource, where `{id}` is to be replaced with some `bucket`'s identifier (`{something}` notation refers to the nearest term from the left unless explicitly specified otherwise).
  * A specific `X-Idempotency-Token` header is added to the request alongside standard headers (which we omit).
  * Terms in angle brackets (`<idempotency token>`) describe the semantics of an entity value (field, header, parameter).
  * A specific JSON, containing a `some_parameter` field and some other unspecified fields (indicated by ellipsis) is being sent as a request body payload.
  * In response (marked with an arrow symbol `→`) the server returns a `404 Not Found` status code; the status might be omitted (treat it like a `200 OK` if no status is provided).
  * The response could possibly contain additional notable headers.
  * The response body is a JSON comprising two fields: `error_reason` and `error_message`. Absence of a value means that the field contains exactly what you expect it should contain — so there is some generic error reason value which we omitted.
  * If some token is too long to fit on a single line, we will split it into several lines adding `↵` to indicate it continues next line.

The term “client” here stands for an application being executed on a user's device, either a native or a web one. The terms “agent” and “user agent” are synonymous with “client.”

Some request and response parts might be omitted if they are irrelevant to the topic being discussed.

Simplified notation might be used to avoid redundancies, like `POST /some-resource` `{…, "some_parameter", …}` → `{ "operation_id" }`; request and response bodies might also be omitted.

We will use sentences like “`POST /v1/bucket/{id}/some-resource` method” (or simply “`bucket/some-resource` method,” “`some-resource`” method — if there are no other `some-resource`s in the chapter, so there is no ambiguity) to refer to such endpoint definitions.

Apart from HTTP API notation, we will employ C-style pseudocode, or, to be more precise, JavaScript-like or Python-like one since types are omitted. We assume such imperative structures are readable enough to skip detailed grammar explanations. HTTP API-like samples intend to illustrate the *contract*, i.e., how we would design an API. Samples in pseudocode are intended to illustrate how developers might work with the API in their code, or how we would implement SDKs based on the contract.