### [API Quality Criteria][intro-api-quality]

Before we start laying out the recommendations, we ought to specify what API we consider “fine,” and what's the profit of having a “fine” API.

Let's discuss the second question first. Obviously, API “finesse” is first of all defined through its capability to solve developers' and users' problems. (One may reasonably say that solving problems might not be the main purpose of offering the API of ours to developers. However, manipulating public opinion is out of this book's author's interest. Here we assume that APIs exist primarily to help people, not for some other covertly declared purposes.)

So, how the “fine” API design might assist developers in solving their (and their users') problems? Quite simply: a well-designed API allows developers to do their jobs in the most efficient and comprehensible manner. The distance from formulating a task to writing working code must be as short as possible. Among other things, it means that:
  * it must be totally obvious out of your API's structure how to solve a task
      * ideally, developers at first glance should be able to understand, what entities are meant to solve their problem
  * the API must be readable;
      * ideally, developers write correct code after just looking at the methods nomenclature, never bothering about details (especially API implementation details!)
      * it is also very important to mention that not only problem solution (the “happy path”) should be obvious, but also possible errors and exceptions (the “unhappy path”) as well
  * the API must be consistent
      * while developing new functionality (i.e., while using previously unknown API entities) developers may write new code similar to the code they have already written using the known API concepts, and this new code will work.

However, the static convenience and clarity of APIs are simple parts. After all, nobody seeks for making an API deliberately irrational and unreadable. When we are developing an API, we always start with clear basic concepts. Providing you've got some experience in APIs, it's quite hard to make an API core that fails to meet obviousness, readability, and consistency criteria.

Problems begin when we start to expand our API. Adding new functionality sooner or later results in transforming once plain and simple API into a mess of conflicting concepts, and our efforts to maintain backward compatibility will lead to illogical, unobvious, and simply bad design solutions. It is partly related to an inability to predict the future in detail: your understanding of “fine” APIs will change over time, both in objective terms (what problems the API is to solve, and what is the best practice) and in subjective terms too (what obviousness, readability, and consistency *really mean* to your API design).

The principles we are explaining below are specifically oriented to making APIs evolve smoothly over time, not being turned into a pile of mixed inconsistent interfaces. It is crucial to understand that this approach isn't free: a necessity to bear in mind all possible extension variants and to preserve essential growth points means interface redundancy and possibly excessing abstractions being embedded in the API design. Besides, both make the developers' jobs harder. **Providing excess design complexities being reserved for future use makes sense only if this future actually exists for your API. Otherwise, it's simply overengineering.**
