### [On Versioning][intro-versioning]

Here and throughout this book, we firmly stick to [semver](https://semver.org/) principles of versioning.

  1. API versions are denoted with three numbers, i.e., `1.2.3`.
  2. The first number (a major version) increases when backward-incompatible changes in the API are introduced.
  3. The second number (a minor version) increases when new functionality is added to the API, keeping backward compatibility intact.
  4. The third number (a patch) increases when a new API version contains bug fixes only.

Sentences “a major API version” and “new API version, containing backward-incompatible changes” are therefore to be considered equivalent ones.

It is usually (though not necessary) agreed that the last stable API release might be referenced by either a full version (e.g., `1.2.3`) or a reduced one (`1.2` or just `1`). Some systems support more sophisticated schemes of defining the desired version (for example, `^1.2.3` reads like “get the last stable API release that is backward-compatible to the `1.2.3` version”) or additional shortcuts (for example, `1.2-beta` to refer to the last beta release of the `1.2` API version family). In this book, we will mostly use designations like `v1` (`v2`, `v3`, etc.) to denote the latest stable release of the `1.x.x` version family of an API.

The practical meaning of this versioning system and the applicable policies will be discussed in more detail in “[The Backward Compatibility Problem Statement](#back-compat-statement)” chapter.
