### [Computed Properties][sdk-computed-properties]

Let's revisit one of the problems we outlined in the “[Problems of Introducing UI Components](#sdk-ui-components)” chapter: the existence of multiple inheritance lines complicates customizing UI components as it implies that component properties could be inherited from any such line. 

For example, imagine we have a button that can borrow its `iconUrl` property from two sources — from data [in our case, from offer data originated in the offer search results] and the component's options:

```typescript
class Button {
  static DEFAULT_OPTIONS = {
    …
    iconUrl: <default icon>
  }

  constructor (data, options) {
    this.data = data;
    // Overriding default options 
    // with custom values
    this.options = extend(
      Button.DEFAULT_OPTIONS,
      options
    )
  }

  render() {
    …
    this.iconElement.src = 
      this.data.iconUrl || 
      this.options.iconUrl
  }
}
```

It is also plausible to suggest that the `iconUrl` property in both hierarchies is inherited from some parent entities:
  * The default option values could be defined in the base class which `Button` extends.
  * The data for the button could be hierarchical (for example, if we decide to group offers in the same coffee shop chain, and the icon is to be taken from the parent group).
  * To facilitate customizing the visual style of the components, we could allow overriding icons in all SDK buttons.

In this situation, a question of priorities arises: if a property is defined in several hierarchies (let's say, in the offer data and in the default options), how should the priorities be set to select one of them?

The straightforward approach to tackling this issue is to prohibit any inheritance and force developers to explicitly set the properties they need. In our example, it would mean that developers will need to write something like this:

```typescript
const button = new Button(data);
if (data.createOrderButtonIconUrl) {
  button.view.iconUrl = 
    data.createOrderButtonIconUrl;
} else if (data.parentCategory.iconUrl) {
  button.view.iconUrl = 
    data.parentCategory.iconUrl;
}
```

The main advantage of this approach is obvious: developers implement the logic they need themselves. The disadvantages are also apparent: first, developers will need to write excessive and often copy-pasted code (“boilerplate”); second, they will soon become confused about which rules are in place and why.

A slightly more complex solution is allowing inheritance but rigidly fixing priorities (let's say the value set in the component's options always takes precedence over the one set in the data, and they both are more important than any inherited value). However, for any complex API, the result will be the same: if developers need a different order of resolving priorities, they will write code similar to the one above.

An alternative approach is to expose the possibility of defining rules for how exactly the icon is resolved for a specific button, either declaratively or imperatively:

```json
// The declarative approach: the rules
// described in some data format
{
  "button.checkout.iconUrl": "@data.iconUrl"
}
```

```typescript
// The imperative approach: the value
// is calculated by the provided function
api.options.addRule(
  'button.checkout.iconUrl',
  (data, options) => data.iconUrl
)
```

The most coherent implementation of this approach is the CSS technology.[ref CSS](https://www.w3.org/Style/CSS/) We are not actually proposing using a full CSS rule engine in component libraries (because of its overwhelming complexity and excessiveness for most cases), but we are cautiously drawing the reader's attention to the fact that supporting some subset of CSS-like rules could *significantly* simplify the task of customizing UI components.

#### Calculated Values

It is important not only to provide a mechanism for setting rules to determine how values are resolved but also to allow *obtaining* the value that was actually used. To achieve this, we need to distinguish between the concept of a set value and a computed value:

```typescript
// Set a value as a percentage
button.view.width = '100%';
// Retrieve the actual applied value
// in pixels
button.view.computedStyle.width;
```

It is also a good practice to provide an event for changes in the computed value of such a calculated property.