### [Synchronization Strategies][api-patterns-sync-strategies]

Let's proceed to the technical problems that API developers face. We begin with the last one described in the introductory chapter: the necessity to synchronize states. Let us imagine that a user creates a request to order coffee through our API. While this request travels from the client to the coffee house and back, many things might happen. Consider the following chain of events:

  1. The client sends the order creation request
  2. Because of network issues, the request propagates to the server very slowly, and the client gets a timeout
      * Therefore, the client does not know whether the query was served or not.
  3. The client requests the current state of the system and gets an empty response as the initial request still hasn't reached the server:
      ```
      const pendingOrders = await 
        api.getOngoingOrders(); // → []
      ```
  4. The server finally gets the initial request for creating an order and serves it.
  5. The client, being unaware of this, tries to create an order anew.

As the operations of reading the list of ongoing orders and of creating a new order happen at different moments of time, we can't guarantee that the system state hasn't changed in between. If we do want to have this guarantee, we must implement some [synchronization strategy](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Synchronization_(computer_science)). In the case of, let's say, operating system APIs or client frameworks we might rely on the primitives provided by the platform. But in the case of distributed client-server APIs, we would need to implement such a primitive of our own.

There are two main approaches to solving this problem: the pessimistic one (implementing locks in the API) and the optimistic one (resource versioning).

**NB**: Generally speaking, the best approach to tackling an issue is not having the issue at all. Let's say, if your API is idempotent, the duplicating calls are not a problem. However, in the real world, not every operation is idempotent; for example, creating new orders is not. We might add mechanisms to prevent *automatic* retries (such as client-generated idempotency tokens) but we can't forbid users from just creating a second identical order.

#### API Locks

The first approach is to literally implement standard synchronization primitives at the API level. Like this, for example:

```
let lock;
try {
  // Capture the exclusive
  // right to create new orders
  lock = await api.
    acquireLock(ORDER_CREATION);
  // Get the list of current orders
  // known to the system
  const pendingOrders = await 
    api.getPendingOrders();
  // If our order is absent,
  // create it
  if (pendingOrders.length == 0) {
    const order = await api
      .createOrder(…)
  }
} catch (e) {
  // Deal with errors
} finally {
  // Unblock the resource
  await lock.release();
}
```

Rather unsurprisingly, this approach sees very rare use in distributed client-server APIs because of the plethora of related problems:

  1. Waiting for acquiring a lock introduces new latencies to the interaction that are hardly predictable and might potentially be quite significant.
  2. The lock itself is one more entity that constitutes a subsystem of its own, and quite a demanding one as [strong consistency](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Strong_consistency) is required for implementing locks: the `getPendingOrders` function must return the up-to-date state of the system otherwise the duplicate order will be anyway created.
  3. As it's partners who develop client code, we can't guarantee it works with locks always correctly. Inevitably, “lost” locks will occur in the system, and that means we need to provide some tools to partners so they can find the problem and debug it.
  4. A certain granularity of locks is to be developed so that partners can't affect each other. We are lucky if there are natural boundaries for a lock — for example, if it's limited to a specific user in the specific partner's system. If we are not so lucky (let's say all partners share the same user profile), we will have to develop even more complex systems to deal with potential errors in the partners' code — for example, introduce locking quotas.

  #### Optimistic Concurrency Control

  A less implementation-heavy approach is to develop an [optimistic concurrency control](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Optimistic_concurrency_control) system, i.e., to require clients to pass a flag proving they know the actual state of a shared resource.

```
// Retrieve the state
const orderState = 
  await api.getOrderState();
// The version is a part
// of the state of the resource
const version = 
  orderState.latestVersion;
// An order might only be created
// if the resource version hasn't
// changed since the last read
try {
  const task = await api
    .createOrder(version, …);
} catch (e) {
  // If the version is wrong, i.e.,
  // another client changed the
  // resource state, an error occurs
  if (Type(e) == INCORRECT_VERSION) {
    // Which should be handled…
  }
}
```

**NB**: An attentive reader might note that the necessity to implement some synchronization strategy and strongly consistent reading has not disappeared: there must be a component in the system that performs a locking read of the resource version and its subsequent change. It's not entirely true as synchronization strategies and strongly consistent reading have disappeared *from the public API*. The distance between the client that sets the lock and the server that processes it became much smaller, and the entire interaction now happens in a controllable environment. It might be a single subsystem in a form of [an ACID-compatible database](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ACID) or even an in-memory solution.

Instead of a version, the date of the last modification of the resource might be used (which is much less reliable as clocks are not ideally synchronized across different system nodes; at least save it with the maximum possible precision!) or entity identifiers (ETags).

The advantage of optimistic concurrency control is therefore the possibility to hide under the hood the complexity of implementing locking mechanisms. The disadvantage is that the versioning errors are no longer exceptional situations — it's now a regular behavior of the system. Furthermore, client developers *must* implement working with them otherwise the application might render inoperable as users will be infinitely creating an order with the wrong version.

**NB**: Which resource to select for making versioning is extremely important. If in our example we create a global system version that is incremented after any order comes, users' chances to successfully create an order will be close to zero.