### [Partial Updates][api-patterns-partial-updates]

The case of partial application of the list of changes described in the previous chapter naturally leads us to the next typical API design problem. What if the operation involves a low-level overwriting of several data fields rather than an atomic idempotent procedure (as in the case of changing the order status)? Let's take a look at the following example:

```
// Creates an order
// consisting of two beverages
POST /v1/orders/
X-Idempotency-Token: <token>
{
  "delivery_address",
  "items": [{
    "recipe": "lungo"
  }, {
    "recipe": "latte",
    "milk_type": "oat"
  }]
}
→
{ "order_id" }
```

```
// Partially updates the order
// by changing the volume
// of the second beverage
PATCH /v1/orders/{id}
{
  "items": [
    // `null` indicates
    // no changes for the
    // first beverage
    null,
    // list of properties
    // to change for
    // the second beverage
    {"volume": "800ml"}
  ]
}
→
{ /* Changes accepted */ }
```

This signature is inherently flawed as its readability is dubious. What does the empty first element in the array mean, deletion of an element or absence of changes? What will happen with fields that are not passed (`delivery_address`, `milk_type`)? Will they reset to default values or remain unchanged?

The most notorious thing here is that no matter which option you choose, your problems have just begun. Let's say we agree that the `"items":[null, {…}]}` construct means the first array element remains untouched. So how do we delete it if needed? Do we invent another “nullish” value specifically to denote removal? The same issue applies to field values: if skipping a field in a request means it should remain unchanged, then how do we reset it to the default value?

Partially updating a resource is one of the most frequent tasks that API developers have to solve, and unfortunately, it is also one of the most complicated. Attempts to take shortcuts and simplify the implementation often lead to numerous problems in the future.

A **trivial solution** is to always overwrite the requested entity completely, which means requiring the passing of the entire object to fully replace the current state and return the new one. However, this simple solution is frequently dismissed due to several reasons:
  * Increased request sizes and, consequently, higher traffic consumption
  * The necessity to detect which fields were actually changed in order to generate proper signals (events) for change listeners
  * The inability to facilitate collaborative editing of the object, meaning allowing two clients to edit different properties of the object in parallel as clients send the full object state as they know it and overwrite each other's changes as they are unaware of them.

To avoid these issues, developers sometimes implement a **naïve solution**:
  * Clients only pass the fields that have changed
  * To reset the values of certain fields and to delete or skip array elements some “special” values are used.

A full example of an API implementing the naïve approach would look like this:

```
// Partially rewrites the order:
//   * Resets the delivery address
//     to the default values
//   * Leaves the first beverage
//     intact
//   * Removes the second beverage.
PATCH /v1/orders/{id}
{
  // “Special” value #1:
  // reset the field
  "delivery_address": null
  "items": [
    // “Special” value #2:
    // do nothing to the entity
    {}, 
    // “Special” value #3:
    // delete the entity
    false
  ]
}
```

This solution allegedly solves the aforementioned problems:
  * Traffic consumption is reduced as only the changed fields are transmitted, and unchanged entities are fully omitted (in our case, replaced with the special value `{}`).
  * Notifications regarding state changes will only be generated for the fields and entities passed in the request.
  * If two clients edit different fields, no access conflict is generated and both sets of changes are applied.

However, upon closer examination all these conclusions seem less viable:
  * We have already described the reasons for increased traffic consumption (excessive polling, lack of pagination and/or field size restrictions) in the “[Describing Final Interfaces](#api-design-describing-interfaces)” chapter, and these issues have nothing to do with passing extra fields (and if they do, it implies that a separate endpoint for “heavy” data is needed).
  * The concept of passing only the fields that have actually changed shifts the burden of detecting which fields have changed onto the client developers' shoulders:
      * Not only does the complexity of implementing the comparison algorithm remain unchanged but we also run the risk of having several independent realizations.
      * The capability of the client to calculate these diffs doesn't relieve the server developers of the duty to do the same as client developers might make mistakes or overlook certain aspects.
  * Finally, the naïve approach of organizing collaborative editing by allowing conflicting operations to be carried out if they don't touch the same fields works only if the changes are transitive. In our case, they are not: the result of simultaneously removing the first element in the list and editing the second one depends on the execution order.
      * Often, developers try to reduce the outgoing traffic volume as well by returning an empty server response for modifying operations. Therefore, two clients editing the same entity do not see the changes made by each other until they explicitly refresh the state, which further increases the chance of yielding highly unexpected results.

The solution could be enhanced by introducing explicit control sequences instead of relying on “magical” values and adding meta settings for the operation (such as a field name filter as it's [implemented in gRPC](https://protobuf.dev/reference/protobuf/google.protobuf/#field-masks-updates)). Here's an example:

```
// Partially rewrites the order:
//   * Resets the delivery address
//     to the default values
//   * Leaves the first beverage
//     intact
//   * Removes the second beverage.
PATCH /v1/orders/{id}?⮠
  // A meta filter: which fields
  // are allowed to be modified
  field_mask=delivery_address,items
{
  // “Special” value #1:
  // reset the field
  "delivery_address": {
    // The `__` prefix is needed 
    // to avoid collisions 
    // with real field names
    "__operation": "reset"
  },
  "items": [
    // “Special” value #2:
    // do nothing to the entity
    { "__operation": "skip" }, 
    // “Special” value #3:
    // delete the entity
    { "__operation": "delete" }
  ]
}
```

While this approach may appear more robust, it doesn't fundamentally address the problems:
  * “Magical” values are replaced with “magical” prefixes
  * The fragmentation of algorithms and the non-transitivity of operations persist.

Given that the format becomes more complex and less intuitively understandable, we consider this enhancement dubious.

A **more consistent solution** is to split an endpoint into several idempotent sub-endpoints, each having its own independent identifier and/or address (which is usually enough to ensure the transitivity of independent operations). This approach aligns well with the decomposition principle we discussed in the “[Isolating Responsibility Areas](#api-design-isolating-responsibility)” chapter.

```
// Creates an order
// comprising two beverages
POST /v1/orders/
{
  "parameters": {
    "delivery_address"
  },
  "items": [{
    "recipe": "lungo"
  }, {
    "recipe": "latte",
    "milk_type": "oats"
  }]
}
→
{
  "order_id", 
  "created_at",
  "parameters": {
    "delivery_address"
  },
  "items": [
    { "item_id", "status"}, 
    { "item_id", "status"}
  ]
}
```

```
// Changes the parameters
// of the second order
PUT /v1/orders/{id}/parameters
{ "delivery_address" }
→
{ "delivery_address" }
```

```
// Partially changes the order
// by rewriting the parameters
// of the second beverage
PUT /v1/orders/{id}/items/{item_id}
{ 
  // All the fields are passed,
  // even if only one has changed
  "recipe", "volume", "milk_type" 
}
→
{ "recipe", "volume", "milk_type" }
```

```
// Deletes one of the beverages
DELETE /v1/orders/{id}/items/{item_id}
```

Now to reset the `volume` field it is enough *not* to pass it in the `PUT items/{item_id}`. Also note that the operations of removing one beverage and editing another one became transitive.

This approach also allows for separating read-only and calculated fields (such as `created_at` and `status`) from the editable ones without creating ambivalent situations (such as what should happen if the client tries to modify the `created_at` field).

Applying this pattern is typically sufficient for most APIs that manipulate composite entities. However, it comes with a price as it sets high standards for designing the decomposed interfaces (otherwise a once neat API will crumble with further API expansion) and the necessity to make many requests to replace a significant subset of the entity's fields (which implies exposing the functionality of applying bulk changes, the undesirability of which we discussed in the previous chapter).

**NB**: while decomposing endpoints, it's tempting to split editable and read-only data. Then the latter might be cached for a long time and there will be no need for sophisticated list iteration techniques. The plan looks great on paper; however, with API expansion, immutable data often ceases to be immutable which is only solvable by creating new versions of the interfaces. We recommend explicitly pronouncing some data non-modifiable in one of the following two cases: either (1) it really cannot become editable without breaking backward compatibility or (2) the reference to the resource (such as, let's say, a link to an image) is fetched via the API itself and you can make these links persistent (i.e., if the image is updated, a new link is generated instead of overwriting the content the old one points to).

#### Resolving Conflicts of Collaborative Editing

The idea of applying changes to a resource state through independent atomic idempotent operations looks attractive as a conflict resolution technique as well. As subcomponents of the resource are fully overwritten, it is guaranteed that the result of applying the changes will be exactly what the user saw on the screen of their device, even if they had observed an outdated version of the resource. However, this approach helps very little if we need a high granularity of data editing as it's implemented in modern services for collaborative document editing and version control systems (as we will need to implement endpoints with the same level of granularity, literally one for each symbol in the document).

To make true collaborative editing possible, a specifically designed format for describing changes needs to be implemented. It must allow for:
  * Ensuring the maximum granularity (each operation corresponds to one distinct user's action)
  * Implementing conflict resolution policies.

In our case, we might take this direction:

```
POST /v1/order/changes
X-Idempotency-Token: <token>
{
  // The revision the client
  // observed when making
  // the changes
  "known_revision",
  "changes": [{
    "type": "set",
    "field": "delivery_address",
    "value": <new value>
  }, {
    "type": "unset_item_field",
    "item_id",
    "field": "volume"
  }],
  …
}
```

This approach is much more complex to implement, but it is the only viable technique for realizing collaborative editing as it explicitly reflects the exact actions the client applied to an entity. Having the changes in this format also allows for organizing offline editing with accumulating changes on the client side for the server to resolve the conflict later based on the revision history.

**NB**: one approach to this task is developing a set of operations in which all actions are transitive (i.e., the final state of the entity does not change regardless of the order in which the changes were applied). One example of such a nomenclature is [CRDT](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Conflict-free_replicated_data_type). However, we consider this approach viable only in some subject areas, as in real life, non-transitive changes are always possible. If one user entered new text in the document and another user removed the document completely, there is no way to automatically resolve this conflict that would satisfy both users. The only correct way of resolving this conflict is explicitly asking users which option for mitigating the issue they prefer.