### [Communicating with Business Owners][api-product-business-comms]

The basics of interacting with business partners are to some extent paradoxically contrary to the basics of communicating with developers:
  * on one side, partners are much more loyal and sometimes even enthusiastic regarding opportunities you offer (especially free ones);
  * on another side, communicating the meaning of your offer to the business owners is much more complicated than conveying it to developers, as it's generally hard to explain what are the advantages of having an API (as a concept) compared to having a service for end users.

After all, working with business auditory essentially means lucidly explaining the characteristics and the advantages of the product. In that sense, API “sells” just like any other kind of software.

As a rule, the farther some industry sector is from information technologies, the more enthusiastic its representatives are about your API features, and the less the chance is that this enthusiasm will be converted into a real integration. The one thing that should help the case is extensive work with the developer community (see the previous chapter) that will result in establishing a circle of freelances and outsourcers eager to help non-IT businesses with integrations. You might help develop this market by the creation of educational courses and issuing certificates proving the bearer's skills of working with your API (or some broader layer of technology).

Market research and getting feedback from business owners work similarly. Those businesses that are far from IT usually can't formulate their demands, so you should be rather creative (and critical-minded) while analyzing the gathered data.