### [On Design Patterns in the API Context][api-patterns-context]

The concept of [“Patterns”](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Software_design_pattern#History) in the field of software engineering was introduced by Kent Beck and Ward Cunningham in 1987 and popularized by “The Gang of Four” (Erich Gamma, Richard Helm, Ralph Johnson, and John Vlissides) in their book “Design Patterns: Elements of Reusable Object-Oriented Software,” which was published in 1994. According to the most widespread definition, a software design pattern is a “general, reusable solution to a commonly occurring problem within a given context.”

If we talk about APIs, especially those to which developers are end users (e.g., frameworks or operating system interfaces), the classical software design patterns are well applicable to them. Indeed, many examples in the previous Section of this book are just about applying some design patterns.

However, if we try to extend this approach to include API development in general, we will soon find that many typical API design issues are high-level and can't be reduced to basic software patterns. Let's say, caching resources (and invalidating the cache) or organizing paginated access are not covered in classical writings.

In this Section, we will specify those API design problems that we see as the most important ones. We are not aiming to encompass *every* problem, let alone every solution, and rather focus on describing approaches to solving typical problems with their pros and cons. We do understand that readers familiar with the works of “The Gang of Four,” Grady Booch, and Martin Fowler might expect a more systematic approach and greater depth of outreach from a section called “The API Patterns,” and we apologize to them in advance.

**NB**: the first such pattern we need to mention is the API-first approach to software engineering, which we [described in the corresponding chapter](#intro-api-first-approach).

#### The Fundamentals of Solving Typical API Design Problems

Before we proceed to the patterns, we need to understand first, how developing APIs differs from developing other kinds of software. Below, we will formulate three important concepts, which we will be referring to in the subsequent chapters.

  1. The more distributed and multi-faceted systems are built and the more general-purpose channels of communication are used, the more errors occur in the process of interaction. In the most interesting case of distributed many-layered client-server systems, raising an exception on the side of a client (like losing context as a result of app crash and restart), server (the pipeline of executing a query threw at some stage), communication channel (connection fully or partially lost), or any other interim agent (intermediate web-server hasn't got a response from backend and returned a gateway error) is a norm of life, and all systems must be designed in a manner that in a case of an exception of any kind, API clients must be able to restore their state and continue operating normally.

  2. The more partners use the API, the more chance is that some of the mechanisms of the expected workflow are implemented wrongly. In other words, not only genuine errors related to network or server overload should be expected, but also logical ones caused by improper API usage (and, in particular, there should be safeguards to avoid errors in one partner's code leading to a denial of service for other partners).

  3. Any part of the system might introduce unpredictable latencies when serving requests, and these latencies could be quite high, up to seconds and tens of seconds. Even if you have full control over the execution environment and network, client apps may hinder themselves due to suboptimal code or execution on low-performing or overloaded devices. As a result, it is important to ensure that proper API design does not rely on critical operations being executed quickly. This includes:
      * If carrying out a task through the API requires making a sequence of calls, there should be a mechanism in place to resume the operation from the current step if needed, instead of restarting it from the beginning.
      * Operations that affect shared resources should have locking mechanisms in place for the duration of the operation.