### [Authenticating Partners and Authorizing API Calls][api-patterns-aa]

Before we proceed further to discussing technical matters, we feel obliged to provide an overview of the problems related to authorizing API calls and authenticating clients. Based on the main principle that “an API serves as a multiplier to both your opportunities and mistakes,” organizing authorization and authentication (AA) is one of the most important challenges that any API vendor faces, especially when it comes to public APIs. It is rather surprising that there is no standard approach to this issue, as every big vendor develops its own interface to solve AA problems, and these interfaces are often quite archaic.

If we set aside implementation details (for which we strongly recommend not reinventing the wheel and using standard techniques and security protocols), there are basically two approaches to authorizing an API call:
  * Introducing a special “robot” type of account into the system, and carrying out the operations on behalf of the robot account.
  * Authorizing the caller system (backend or client application) as a single entity, using API keys, signatures, or certificates for the purpose of authenticating such calls.

The difference between the two approaches lies in the access granularity:
  * If an API client is making requests as a regular user of the system, then it can only perform operations allowed for a specific user, which often means it might have access only to a partial dataset within the API endpoint.
  * If the caller system is authorized, it implies that it has full access to the endpoint and can supply any parameters, i.e., has access to the full dataset exposed through the endpoint.

Therefore, the first approach is more granular (the robot might be a “virtual employee” with access only to a limited dataset) and is a natural choice for APIs that are supplemental to an existing service for end users (and thus can reuse the existing AA solutions). However, this approach has some disadvantages:
  * The need to develop a process for securely fetching authorization tokens for the robot user (e.g., via having a real user generate tokens in the web UI), as regular login-password authentication (especially multi-factored) is not well-suited for API clients.
  * The need to make exceptions for robot users in almost every security protocol:
      * Robots might make many more requests per second than real users and might perform several queries in parallel (possibly from different IP addresses located in different availability zones).
      * Robots do not accept cookies and cannot solve captchas.
      * Robots should not be logged out or have their token invalidated “just in case” (as it would impact the partner's business processes), so it is usually necessary to invent specific long-lived tokens for robots and/or token renewal procedures.
  * Finally, you may encounter significant challenges if you need to allow robots to perform operations on behalf of other users (as you will have to either expose this functionality to all users or, conversely, hide its existence from them).

If the API is not about providing additional access to a service for end users, it is usually much easier to opt for the second approach and authorize clients with API keys. In this case, per-endpoint granularity can be achieved (i.e., allowing partners to regulate the set of permitted endpoints for a key), while developing more granular access can be much more complex and rarely implemented.

Both approaches can be morphed into each other (e.g., allowing robot users to perform operations on behalf of any other users effectively becomes API key-based authorization; allowing binding of a limited dataset to an API key effectively becomes a user account), and there are some hybrid systems in the wild (where the request requires being signed with both an API key and a user token).