### [The API as a Product][api-product]

There are two important statements regarding APIs viewed as products.

  1. APIs are *proper products*, just like any other kind of software. You are “selling” them in the same manner, and all the principles of product management are fully applicable to them. It is quite doubtful that you would be able to develop APIs well unless you conduct proper market research, learn customers' needs, and study competitors, supply, and demand.

  2. However, APIs are *quite special products*. You are selling the possibility to perform some actions programmatically by writing code, and this fact puts some restrictions on product management.

To properly develop the API product, you must be able to answer this question precisely: why would your customers prefer to perform those actions programmatically? It is not an idle question: based on this book's author's experience, the lack of expertise by product owners in working with APIs *is exactly* the biggest problem in API product development.

End users interact with your API indirectly, through applications built upon it by software engineers acting on behalf of some company (and sometimes there is more than one engineer in between you and an end user). From this perspective, the API's target audience resembles a Maslow-like pyramid:
  * Users constitute the base of the pyramid; they seek the fulfillment of their needs and do not think about technicalities.
  * Business owners form the middle level; they match users' needs against technical capabilities declared by developers and build products.
  * Developers make up the apex of the pyramid; it is developers who work with APIs directly, and they decide which of the competing APIs to choose.

The obvious conclusion of this model is that you must advertise the advantages of your API to developers. They will select the technology, and business owners will translate the concept to end users. If former or acting developers manage the API product, they often tend to evaluate the API's market competitiveness in this dimension only and mainly focus the product promotion efforts on the developer audience.

“Stop!” the mindful reader must yell at this moment. “The actual order of things is exactly the opposite!”
  * Developers are typically a hired workforce implementing the tasks set by business owners (and even if a developer implements their own project, they still choose an API that best fits the project, thus being employers of themselves).
  * Business leaders do not set tasks based on their sense of style or code elegance; they need certain functionality to be implemented — functionality that solves their customers' problems.
  * Finally, customers do not concern themselves with the technical aspects of the solution; they choose the product they need and request specific functionality to be implemented.

So it turns out that customers are at the apex of the pyramid: it is customers whom you need to convince that they need not just *any* cup of coffee, but a cup of coffee brewed using our API (an interesting question arises: how will we convey the knowledge of which API works under the hood and why customers should pay for it!); then business owners will set the task to integrate the API, and developers will have no other choice but to implement it (which, by the way, means that investing in the readability and consistency of the API is not *that* important).

The truth, of course, lies somewhere in between. In some markets and subject areas, it is developers who make decisions (e.g., which framework to choose); in other markets and areas, it might be business owners or customers. It also depends on the competitiveness of the market: introducing a new frontend framework does not encounter much resistance while developing, let's say, a new mobile operating system requires million-dollar investments in promotions and strategic partnerships.

Hereafter, we will describe some “averaged” situations, meaning that all three levels of the pyramid are important: customers choose the product that best fits their needs, business owners seek quality guarantees and lower development costs, and software engineers care about the API capabilities and the convenience of working with it.