### [Developing a Product Vision][api-product-vision]

The above-mentioned fragmentation of the API target audience, i.e., the “developers — business — end users” triad, makes API product management quite a non-trivial problem. Yes, the basics are the same: find your audience's needs and satisfy them. The problem is that your product has several different audiences, and their interests sometimes diverge. The end users' request for an affordable cup of coffee does not automatically imply business demand for a coffee machine API.

Generally speaking, the API product vision must include the same three elements:
  * Grasping how *end users* would like to have their problems solved
  * Projecting how *businesses* would solve those problems if appropriate tools existed
  * Understanding what technical solutions for *developers* might exist to help them implement the functionality businesses would ask for, and where the boundaries of their applicability lie.

In different markets and different situations, the “weight” of each element differs. If you're creating an API-first product for developers with no UI components, you might skip the end users' problem analysis. On the other hand, if you're providing an API with extremely valuable functionality and you hold a close-to-monopolistic position in the market, you might actually not care about how developers love your software architecture or the convenience of your interfaces for them, as they simply have no other choice.

Still, in the majority of cases, we have to deal with two-step heuristics based on either technical capabilities or business demands:
  * You might first form the vision of how you can help business owners given the technical capabilities you have (heuristics step one) then develop a general vision of how your API will be used to satisfy end users' needs (heuristics step two), or
  * Given your understanding of business owners' problems, you can take one heuristic “step right” to outline future functionality for end users and one “step left” to evaluate possible technical solutions.

Since both approaches are still heuristic, the API product vision is inevitably fuzzy, and that's quite normal. If you had a full and clear understanding of what end-user products could be developed on top of your API, you might have developed them yourself, bypassing intermediary agents. It is also important to keep in mind that many APIs go through the “terraforming” stage (see the previous chapter), preparing the ground for new markets and new types of services. Therefore, your idealistic vision of a nearby future where delivering freshly brewed coffee by drones becomes the norm of life is to be refined and clarified as new companies providing new kinds of services enter the market. (This, in turn, will impact monetization models as detailing the countenance of the forthcoming will make your abstract KPIs and theoretical benefits of having an API more and more concrete.)

The same fuzziness should be kept in mind when conducting interviews and gathering feedback. Software engineers will mainly report problems they encountered during technical integrations and rarely discuss business-related issues. Meanwhile, business owners care little about the inconvenience of writing code. Both groups will have some knowledge regarding end users' problems, but it's usually limited to the market segment in which the partner operates.

If you do have access to end users' action monitoring (see “[The API Key Performance Indicators](#api-product-kpi)” chapter), you can try to analyze typical user behavior through these logs and understand how users interact with the partners' applications. However, you will need to conduct this analysis on a per-application basis and attempt to clusterize the most common scenarios.

#### Checking Product Hypotheses

In addition to the general complexity of formulating the product vision, there are also tactical issues with checking product hypotheses. “The Holy Grail” of product management — creating a cheap (in terms of resource expenditure) minimal viable product (MVP) — is typically unavailable for an API product manager. The reason is that you can't easily *test* the solution even if you manage to develop an API MVP. To do so, partners would need to *develop an application*, i.e., invest their money. If the outcome of the experiment is negative, meaning that further development appears unpromising, this money will be wasted. Of course, partners will be a little bit skeptical towards such proposals. Therefore, a “cheap” MVP should include either compensation for partners' expenses or a budget to develop a reference implementation (i.e., a complementary application specifically developed to support the API MVP).

You can partially address the problem by having a third-party company release the MVP, for example, in the form of an open-source module published in a developer's personal repository. However, you will struggle with hypothesis validation issues as such modules might easily go unnoticed.

Another option for checking conjectures is recruiting other developers within the API provider company to try the API in their services. Internal customers are usually much more loyal towards spending some effort to check a hypothesis, and it's much easier to negotiate MVP curtailing or freezing with them. The problem is that you can only validate those ideas that are relevant to the company's internal needs.

Also, applying the “eat your own dog food” concept to APIs means that the API product team should have their own test applications (so-called “pet projects”) on top of the API. Given the complexity of developing such applications, it makes sense to encourage having them, for example, by giving free API quotas to team members and providing sufficient free computational resources.

Such pet projects are also valuable because of the unique experience they allow to gain: everyone might try a new role. Developers will learn about product managers' typical problems: it's not enough to write good code, you also need to know your customer, understand their demands, formulate an attractive concept, and effectively communicate it. On the other hand, product managers will gain understanding of how exactly easy or hard it is to bring their product vision to life and what challenges they may face. Finally, both groups will benefit from taking a fresh look at the API documentation and putting themselves in the shoes of a developer who is hearing about the API product for the first time and struggling to grasp the basics.