### [Communicating with Developers][api-product-devrel]

As we have described in the previous chapters, managing an API product requires building relations with both business partners and developers. (Ideally, with end users as well; though this option is seldom available to API providers.)

Let's start with developers. The specifics of software engineers as an auditory are the following:
  * Developers are highly-educated individuals with practical thinking; as a rule, they choose technical products with extreme rationality (unless you're giving them cool backpacks with fancy prints for free).
      * This doesn't prevent them from having a certain aptitude towards, let's say, specific programming languages or frameworks; however, *affecting* those aptitudes is extremely hard and is normally not in the API vendor's power.
  * In particular, developers are quite skeptical towards promotional materials and overstatements and are ready to actually check whether your claims are true.
  * It is very hard to communicate to them via regular marketing channels; they get information from highly specialized communities, and they stick to opinions proved by concrete numbers and examples (ideally, code samples).
      * The “influencers” words are not very valuable to them, as no opinions are trusted if unsubstantiated.
  * The Open Source and free software ideas are widespread among developers If you try to make money out of things that must be free and/or open from their point of view (for example, by proclaiming interfaces an intellectual property), you will face resistance (and views on this “musts”… differ).

Because of the above-mentioned specifics (first of all, the relative insignificance of influencers and the critical attitude towards promotions), you will have to communicate to developers via very specific media:
  * Collective blogs (like the “r/programming” subreddit or dev.to)
  * Q&A sites (StackOverflow, Experts Exchange)
  * Educational services (CodeAcademy, Udemy)
  * Technical conferences and webinars.

In all these channels, the direct advertising of your API is either problematic or impossible. (Well, strictly speaking, you may buy the banner on one of the sites advertising the advantages of your API, but we hardly doubt it will improve your relations with developers.) You need to generate some valuable and/or interesting content for them, which will improve the knowledge of your API. And this is the job for your developers: writing articles, answering questions, recording webinars, and giving pitches.

Developers do like sharing the experience, and will probably be eager to do it — during their work hours. A proper conference talk, let alone an educational course, requires a lot of preparation time. Out of this book's author's experience, two things are crucial for tech-PR:
  * Incentives, even nominal ones — the job of promoting a product should be rewarded
  * Methodicalness and quality standards — you might actually do the content review just like you do the code review.

Nothing could make the worse counter-advertising for your product than a poorly prepared pitch (as we said, the mistakes will be inevitably found and pointed to) or a badly camouflaged commercial in a form of a pitch (the reason is actually the same). Texts are to be worked upon: pay attention to the structure, logic, and tempo of the narration. Even a technical story must be finely constructed; after it's ended, the listeners must have a clear understanding of what idea you wanted to communicate (and it'd rather be somehow coupled with your API's fitness for their needs).

A word on “evangelists” (those are people who have some credibility in the IT community and work on promoting a technology or a tech company, being a company's contractor or even a staff member, effectively carrying out all those above-mentioned activities like blog-posting, course-preparing, conference-speaking, etc.) Having an evangelist makes the API development team exempt from the necessity of performing the tech-PR. However, we would rather advise having this expertise inside the team, as direct interaction with developers helps with forming the product vision. (That doesn't mean the evangelists are not needed at all - you might well combine these two strategies.)

#### Open Source

The important question which sooner or later will stand in any API vendor's way is making the source code open. This decision has both advantages and disadvantages:
  * You will improve the knowledge of the brand, and some respect will be paid to you by the IT community.
      * That's given your code is finely written and commented.
  * You will get some additional feedback — ideally, pull requests from third-party developers
      * And you will also get a number of inquiries and comments ranging from useless to obviously provocative ones, to which you will have to respond politely.
  * Donating code to open source makes developers trust the company more, and affects their readiness to rely on the platform.
      * But it also increases risks, both from the information security point of view and from the product one, as a dissatisfied community might fork your repo and create a competing product.

Finally, just the preparations to make the code open might be very expensive: you need to clean the code, switch to open building and testing tools, and remove all references to proprietary resources. This decision is to be made very cautiously, after having all pros and cons elaborated over. We might add that many companies try to reduce the risks by splitting the API code into two parts, the open one and the proprietary one, and also by selecting a license that disallows harming the company's interests by using the open-sourced code (for example, by prohibiting selling hosted solutions or by requiring the derivative works to be open-sourced as well).

#### The Auditory Fragmentation

There is one very important addition to the discourse: as informational technologies are universally in great demand, a significant percentage of your customers will not be professional software engineers. A huge number of people are somewhere on the track of mastering the occupation: someone is trying to write code in addition to the basic duties, another one is being retrained now, and the third one is studying the basics of computer science on their own. Many of those non-professional developers make a direct impact on the process of selecting an API vendor — for example, small business owners who additionally seek to automate some routine tasks programmatically.

It will be more correct if we say that you're actually working for two main types of audiences:
  * Beginners and amateurs, for whom each of those integration tasks would be completely new and unexplored territory
  * Professional developers who possess vast experience in integrating different third-party systems.

This fact greatly affects everything we had discussed previously (except for, maybe, open-sourcing, as amateur developers pay little attention to it):
  * Your pitches, webinars, lectures, etc., must somehow fit both professional and semi-professional audiences. 
  * A huge share of customers' inquiries to your customer support service will be generated by the first category of developers: it's much harder for amateurs or beginners to find answers to their questions by themselves, and they will address them to you.
  * At the same time, the second category is much more sensitive to the quality of both the product and customer support, and fulfilling their requests might be non-trivial.

Finally, it's almost impossible in a course of a single product to create an API that will fit well both amateur and professional developers: the former need the maximum simplicity of implementing basic use cases, while the latter seek the ability to adapt the API to match technological stack and development paradigms, and the problems they solve usually require deep customization. We will discuss the matter in “[The API Services Range](#api-product-range)” chapter.
