### [Communicating with Business Owners][api-product-business-comms]

The basics of interacting with business partners are to some extent paradoxically contrary to the basics of communicating with developers:
  * On one hand, partners are much more loyal and sometimes even enthusiastic regarding opportunities you offer (especially free ones).
  * On the other hand, communicating the meaning of your offer to the business owners is much more complicated than conveying it to developers, as it's generally hard to explain what are the advantages of integrating via APIs (as a concept).

After all, working with business audience essentially means lucidly explaining the characteristics and the advantages of the product. In that sense, API “sells” just like any other kind of software.

As a rule, the farther some industry sector from information technologies is, the more enthusiastic its representatives about your API features are, and the less is the chance that this enthusiasm will be converted into a real integration. The one thing that should help the case is extensive work with the developer community (see the previous chapter) that will result in establishing a circle of freelancers and outsourcers eager to help non-IT businesses with integrations. You might help in developing this market by creating educational courses and issuing certificates proving the bearer's skills in working with your API (or some broader layer of technology).

Market research and getting feedback from business owners work similarly. Those businesses that are far from IT usually can't formulate their demands, so you should be rather creative (and critical-minded) while analyzing the gathered data.