### [Supporting Customers][api-product-customer-support]

Let's shift our focus from banning users to supporting them. First and foremost, it's essential to clarify that when we discuss supporting API customers, we are referring to aiding developers and to some extent business partners. End users rarely directly interact with APIs directly, except for a few non-standard cases:

  1. If the API vendor can not reach partners who are using the API incorrectly, it might have to display errors that end users can see. This situation might arise if the API was initially provided for free with minimal partner identification requirements during the growth phase, and then the conditions changed (such as a popular API version no longer being supported or becoming a paid service).

  2. If the API vendor cannot reproduce a problem and needs to reach out end users to gather additional diagnostics.

  3. If the API is used to collect UGC content.

The first two cases are, in fact, consequences of product or technical flaws in API development and they should be avoided. The third case differs little from supporting end users of the UGC service itself.

When discussing support for partners, it revolves around two major topics:
  * Legal and administrative support regarding the terms of service and the SLA. This typically involves responding to inquiries from business owners.
  * Assisting developers with technical issues.

While the former is undoubtedly crucial for any healthy service including APIs, it bears little API-related specifics. In the context of this book, our primary focus is on the latter.

As an API is a product for developers, customer will, in fact, inquire about how this specific piece of code that they have written works. This fact raises the level of expertise required among customer support staff quite high as you need a software engineer to read the code and understand the problem. But this is only half of the problem; another half is, as we have mentioned in previous chapters, that most of these questions will be asked by inexperienced or amateur developers. In the case of a popular API, it means that 9 out of 10 inquiries *will not be about the API*. Less skilled developers lack language knowledge, have fragmented experience with the platform, and struggle to articulate their problems effectively (and therefore search for an answer on the Internet before contacting support, although, let's be honest, they usually don't even try).

There are several options for addressing these issues:

  1. The most user-friendly scenario is to hire individuals with basic technical skills for the first line of support. These employees must possess sufficient expertise in understanding how the API works to identify unrelated questions and respond to them with corresponding FAQs. They should also be capable of pointing users toward external resources, such as the OS support service or the community forum for the programming language, if the problem is not about the API itself, and redirect relevant issues to the API developers.

  2. The inverse scenario requires partners to pay for technical support, with API developers responsible for answering questions. While this approach doesn't significantly impact the quality of inquiries (as it still primarily involves inexperienced developers who can't solve problems independently), it eliminates hiring challenges. This allows for the luxury of having engineers handle first-line support.

  3. In some cases, the developer community, either partially or fully, can assist in resolving amateur problems (see the “[Communicating with Developers](#api-product-devrel)” chapter). Community members are often capable of answering these questions, especially with the assistance of moderators.

Importantly, regardless of the chosen option, API developers must handle second-line support because only they can fully understand the problems and the partners' code. That implies two important consequences:

  1. You must take into account working with inquiries when planning the API development team's time. Reading unfamiliar code and remote debugging are challenging and exhausting tasks. The more functionality you expose and the more platforms you support, the heavier the load on the team in terms of dealing with support tickets.

  2. As a rule, developers are totally not happy about the prospect of coping with incoming requests and answering them. The first line of support will still let through a lot of dilettante or poorly formulated questions, and that will annoy on-duty API developers. There are several approaches to mitigate this problem:

     * Try to find individuals with a customer-oriented mindset who enjoy this activity, and encourage them (including financial stimulus) to perform support functions. This could be someone on the team (not necessarily a developer) or an active community member.

     * Distribute the remaining workload among the developers equitably and fairly, up to introducing a duty calendar.

And of course, analyzing the questions is a useful exercise for populating FAQs and improving documentation and first-line support scripts.

#### External Platforms

Sooner or later, you will discover that customers ask their questions not only through official channels but also on various Internet-based forums, starting from those specifically created for this purpose, like StackOverflow, and ending with social networks and personal blogs. Whether you choose to invest time in searching for such inquiries is up to you. We would rather recommend providing support through platforms that offer convenient tools for supporting users, such as subscribing to specific tags.