### [Components of an HTTP Request and Their Semantics][http-api-requests-semantics]

The third important exercise we must conduct is to describe the format of an HTTP request and response and explain the basic concepts. Many of these may seem obvious to the reader. However, the situation is that even the basic knowledge we require to move further is scattered across vast and fragmented documentation, causing even experienced developers to struggle with some nuances. Below, we will try to compile a structured overview that is sufficient to design HTTP APIs.

To describe the semantics and formats, we will refer to the brand-new [RFC 9110](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9110.html), which replaces no fewer than nine previous specifications dealing with different aspects of the technology. However, a significant volume of additional functionality is still covered by separate standards. In particular, the HTTP caching principles are described in the standalone [RFC 9111](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9111.html), while the popular `PATCH` method is omitted in the main RFC and is regulated by [RFC 5789](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc5789.html).

An HTTP request consists of (1) applying a specific verb to a URL, stating (2) the protocol version, (3) additional meta-information in headers, and (4) optionally, some content (request body):

```
POST /v1/orders HTTP/1.1
Host: our-api-host.tld
Content-Type: application/json

{
  "coffee_machine_id": 123,
  "currency_code": "MNT",
  "price": "10.23",
  "recipe": "lungo",
  "offer_id": 321,
  "volume": "800ml"
}
```

An HTTP response to such a request includes (1) the protocol version, (2) a status code with a corresponding message, (3) response headers, and (4) optionally, response content (body):

```
HTTP/1.1 201 Created
Location: /v1/orders/123
Content-Type: application/json

{
  "id": 123
}
```

**NB**: in HTTP/2 (and future HTTP/3), separate binary frames are used for headers and data instead of the holistic text format. However, this doesn't affect the architectural concepts we will describe below. To avoid ambiguity, we will provide examples in the HTTP/1.1 format. You can find detailed information about the HTTP/2 format [here](https://hpbn.co/http2/).

##### A URL

A Uniform Resource Locator (URL) is an addressing unit in an HTTP API. Some evangelists of the technology even use the term “URL space” as a synonym for “The World Wide Web.” It is expected that a proper HTTP API should employ an addressing system that is as granular as the subject area itself; in other words, each entity that the API can manipulate should have its own URL.

The URL format is governed by a [separate standard](https://url.spec.whatwg.org/) developed by an independent body known as the Web Hypertext Application Technology Working Group (WHATWG). The concepts of URLs and Uniform Resource Names (URNs) together constitute a more general entity called Uniform Resource Identifiers (URIs). (The difference between the two is that a URL allows for *locating* a resource within the framework of some protocol whereas a URN is an “internal” entity name that does not provide information on how to find the resource.)

URLs can be decomposed into sub-components, each of which is optional. While the standard enumerates a number of legacy practices, such as passing logins and passwords in URLs or using non-UTF encodings, we will skip discussing those. Instead, we will focus on the following components that are relevant to the topic of HTTP API design:
  * A scheme: a protocol to access the resource (in our case it is always `https:`)
  * A host: a top-level address unit in the form of either a domain name or an IP address. A host might contain subdomains.
  * A port.
  * A path: a URL part between the host (including port) and the `?` or `#` symbols or the end of the line.
      * The path itself is usually decomposed into parts using the `/` symbol as a delimiter. However, the standard does not define any semantics for it.
      * Two paths, one ending with `/` and one without it (for example, `/root/leaf` and `/root/leaf/`), are considered different paths according to the standard. Conversely, two URLs that differ only in trailing slashes in their paths are considered different as well. However, we are unaware of a single argument to differentiate such URLs in practice.
      * Paths may contain `.` and `..` parts, which are supposed to be interpreted similarly to analogous symbols in file paths (meaning that  `/root/leaf`, `/root/./leaf`, and `/root/branch/../leaf` are equivalent).
  * A query: a URL part between the `?` symbol and either `#` or the end of the line.
      * A query is usually decomposed into `key=value` pairs split by the `&` character. Again, the standard does not require this or define the semantics.
      * Nor does the standard imply any normalization of the ordering. URLs that differ only in the order of keys in the queries are considered different.
  * A fragment (also known as an anchor): a part of a URL that follows the `#` sign.
      * Fragments are usually treated as addresses within the requested document and because of that are often omitted by user agents while executing the request.
      * Two URLs that only differ in fragment parts may be considered equal or not, depending on the context.

In HTTP requests, the scheme, host, and port are usually (but not always) omitted and presumed to be equal to the connection parameters. (Fielding actually names this arrangement one of the biggest flaws in the protocol design.)

Traditionally, it is implied that paths describe a strict hierarchy of resource subordination (for example, the URL of a specific coffee machine in our API could look like `places/{id}/coffee-machines/{id}`, since a coffee machine strictly belongs to one coffee shop), while query parameters express non-strict hierarchies and operation parameters (for example, the URL for searching listings could look like `search?location=<map point>`).

Additionally, the standard contains rules for serializing, normalizing, and comparing URLs, knowing which can be useful for an HTTP API developer.

##### Headers

Headers contain *metadata* associated with a request or a response. They might describe properties of entities being passed (e.g., `Content-Length`), provide additional information regarding a client or a server (e.g., `User-Agent`, `Date`, etc.) or simply contain additional fields that are not directly related to the request/response semantics (such as `Authorization`).

The important feature of headers is the possibility to read them before the message body is fully transmitted. This allows for altering request or response handling depending on the headers, and it is perfectly fine to manipulate headers while proxying requests. Many network agents actually do this, i.e., add, remove, or modify headers while proxying requests. In particular, modern web browsers automatically add a number of technical headers, such as `User-Agent`, `Origin`, `Accept-Language`, `Connection`, `Referer`, `Sec-Fetch-*`, etc., and modern server software automatically adds or modifies such headers as `X-Powered-By`, `Date`, `Content-Length`, `Content-Encoding`, `X-Forwarded-For`, etc.

This freedom in manipulating headers can result in unexpected problems if an API uses them to transmit data as the field names developed by an API vendor can accidentally overlap with existing conventional headers, or worse, such a collision might occur in the future at any moment. To avoid this issue, the practice of adding the prefix `X-` to custom header names was frequently used in the past. More than ten years ago this practice was officially discouraged (see the detailed overview in [RFC 6648](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc6648)). Nevertheless, the prefix has not been fully abolished, and many semi-standard headers still contain it (notably, `X-Forwarded-For`). Therefore, using the `X-` prefix reduces the probability of collision but does not eliminate it. The same RFC reasonably suggests using the API vendor name as a prefix instead of `X-`. (We would rather recommend using both, i.e., sticking to the `X-ApiName-FieldName` format. Here `X-` is included for readability [to distinguish standard fields from custom ones], and the company or API name part helps avoid collisions with other non-standard header names).

Additionally, headers are used as control flow instructions for so-called “content negotiation,” which allows the client and server to agree on a response format (through `Accept*` headers) and to perform conditional requests that aim to reduce traffic by skipping response bodies, either fully or partially (through `If-*` headers, such as `If-Range`, `If-Modified-Since`, etc.)

##### HTTP Verbs

One important component of an HTTP request is a method (verb) that describes the operation being applied to a resource. RFC 9110 standardizes eight verbs — namely, `GET`, `POST`, `PUT`, `DELETE`, `HEAD`, `CONNECT`, `OPTIONS`, and `TRACE` — of which we as API developers are interested in the former four. The `CONNECT`, `OPTIONS`, and `TRACE` methods are technical and rarely used in HTTP APIs (except for `OPTIONS`, which needs to be implemented to ensure access to the API from a web browser). Theoretically, the `HEAD` verb, which allows for requesting *resource metadata only*, might be quite useful in API design. However, for reasons unknown to us, it did not take root in this capacity.

Apart from RFC 9110, many other specifications propose additional HTTP verbs, such as `COPY`, `LOCK`, `SEARCH`, etc. — the full list can be found in [the registry](http://www.iana.org/assignments/http-methods/http-methods.xhtml). However, only one of them gained widespread popularity — the `PATCH` method. The reasons for this state of affairs are quite trivial: the five methods (`GET`, `POST`, `PUT`, `DELETE`, and `PATCH`) are enough for almost any API.

HTTP verbs define two important characteristics of an HTTP call:
  * Semantics: what the operation *means*
  * Side effects:
      * Whether the request modifies any resource state or if it is safe (and therefore, could it be cached)
      * Whether the request is idempotent or not.

| Verb | Semantics | Is safe (non-modifying) | Is idempotent | Can have a body |
|------|-----------|-------------------------|---------------|------------|
| GET    | Returns a representation of a resource | Yes | Yes | Should not |
| PUT    | Replaces (fully overwrites) a resource with a provided entity | No | Yes | Yes |
| DELETE | Deletes a resource | No | Yes | Should not |
| POST   | Processes a provided entity according to its internal semantics | No | No | Yes |
| PATCH  | Modifies (partially overwrites) a resource with a provided entity | No | No | Yes |

The most important property of modifying idempotent verbs is that **the URL serves as an idempotency key for the request**. The `PUT /url` operation fully overwrites a resource, so repeating the request won't change the resource. Conversely, retrying a `DELETE /url` request must leave the system in the same state where the `/url` resource is deleted. Regarding the `GET /url` method, it must semantically return the representation of the same target resource `/url`. If it exists, its implementation must be consistent with prior `PUT` / `DELETE` operations. If the resource was overwritten via `PUT /url`, a subsequent  `GET /url` call must return a representation that matches the entity enclosed in the `PUT /url` request. In the case of JSON-over-HTTP APIs, this simply means that `GET /url` returns the same data as what was passed in the preceding `PUT /url`, possibly normalized and equipped with default values. On the other hand, a `DELETE /url` call must remove the resource, resulting in subsequent `GET /url` requests returning a `404` or `410` error.

The idempotency and symmetry of the `GET` / `PUT` / `DELETE` methods imply that neither `GET` nor `DELETE` can have a body as no reasonable meaning could be associated with it. However, most web server software allows these methods to have bodies and transmits them further to the endpoint handler, likely because many software engineers are unaware of the semantics of the verbs (although we strongly discourage relying on this behavior).

For obvious reasons, responses to modifying endpoints are not cached (though there are some conditions to use a response to a `POST` request as cached data for subsequent `GET` requests). This ensures that repeating `POST` / `PUT` / `DELETE` / `PATCH` requests will hit the server as no intermediary agent can respond with a cached result. In the case of a `GET` request, it is generally not true. Only the presence of `no-store` or `no-cache` directives in the response guarantees that the subsequent `GET` request will reach the server.

One of the most widespread HTTP API design antipatterns is violating the semantics of HTTP verbs:
  * Placing modifying operations in a `GET` handler. This can lead to the following problems:
      * Interim agents might respond to such a request using a cached value if a required caching directive is missing, or vice versa, automatically repeat a request upon receiving a network timeout.
      * Some agents consider themselves eligible to traverse hyper-references (i.e., making HTTP `GET` requests) without the explicit user's consent. For example, social networks and messengers perform such calls to generate a preview for a link when a user tries to share it.
  * Placing non-idempotent operations in `PUT` / `DELETE` handlers.  Although interim agents do not typically repeat modifying requests regardless of their alleged idempotency, a client or server framework can easily do so. This mistake is often coupled with requiring passing a body alongside a `DELETE` request to discern the specific object that needs to be deleted, which per se is a problem as any interim agent might discard such a body.
  * Ignoring the `GET` / `PUT` / `DELETE` symmetry requirement. This can manifest in different ways, such as:
      * Making a `GET /url` operation return data even after a successful `DELETE /url` call
      * Making a `PUT /url` operation take the identifiers of the entities to modify from the request body instead of the URL, resulting in the `GET /url` operation's inability to return a representation of the entity passed to the `PUT /url` handler.

##### Status Codes

A status code is a machine-readable three-digit number that describes the outcome of an HTTP request. There are five groups of status codes:
  * `1xx` codes are informational. Among these, the `100 Continue` code is probably the only one that is commonly used.
  * `2xx` codes indicate that the operation was successful.
  * `3xx` codes are redirection codes, implying that additional actions must be taken to consider the operation fully successful.
  * `4xx` codes represent client errors
  * `5xx` codes represent server errors.

**NB**: the separation of codes into groups by the first digit is of practical importance. If the client is unaware of the meaning of an `xyz` code returned by the server, it must conduct actions as if an `x00` code was received.

The idea behind status codes is obviously to make errors machine-readable so that all interim agents can detect what has happened with a request. The HTTP status code nomenclature effectively describes nearly every problem applicable to an HTTP request, such as invalid `Accept-*` header values, missing `Content-Length`, unsupported HTTP verbs, excessively long URIs, etc.

Unfortunately, the HTTP status code nomenclature is not well-suited for describing errors in *business logic*. To return machine-readable errors related to the semantics of the operation, it is necessary either to use status codes unconventionally (i.e., in violation of the standard) or to enrich responses with additional fields. Designing custom errors in HTTP APIs will be discussed in the corresponding chapter.

**NB**: note the problem with the specification design. By default, all `4xx` codes are non-cacheable, but there are several exceptions, namely the `404`, `405`, `410`, and `414` codes. While we believe this was done with good intentions, the number of developers aware of this nuance is likely to be similar to the number of HTTP specification editors.

#### One Important Remark Regarding Caching

Caching is a crucial aspect of modern microservice architecture design. It can be tempting to control caching at the protocol level, and the HTTP standard provides various tools to facilitate this. However, the author of this book must warn you: if you decide to utilize these tools, it is essential to thoroughly understand the standard. Flaws in the implementation of certain techniques can result in disruptive behavior. The author personally experienced a major outage caused by the aforementioned lack of knowledge regarding the default cacheability of `404` responses. In this incident, some settings for an important geographical area were mistakenly deleted. Although the problem was quickly localized and the settings were restored, the service remained inoperable in the area for several hours because clients had cached the `404` response and did not request it anew until the cache had expired.

#### One Important Remark Regarding Consistency

One parameter might be placed in different components of an HTTP request. For example, an identifier of a partner making a request might be passed as part of:
  * A domain name, e.g., `{partner_id}.domain.tld`
  * A path, e.g., `/v1/{partner_id}/orders`
  * A query parameter, e.g. `/v1/orders?partner_id=<partner_id>`
  * A header value, e.g.
      ```
      GET /v1/orders HTTP/1.1
      X-ApiName-Partner-Id: <partner_id>
      ```
  * A field within the request body, e.g.
      ```
      POST /v1/orders/retrieve HTTP/1.1

      {
        "partner_id": <partner_id>
      }
      ```

There are also more exotic options, such as placing a parameter in the scheme of a request or in the `Content-Type` header.

However, when we move a parameter around different components, we face three annoying issues:
  * Some tokens are case-sensitive (path, query parameters, JSON field names), while others are not (domain and header names)
      * With header *values*, there is even more chaos: some of them are required to be case-insensitive (e.g., `Content-Type`), while others are prescribed to be case-sensitive (e.g., `ETag`)
  * Allowed symbols and escaping rules differ as well:
      * Notably, there is no widespread practice for escaping the `/`, `?`, and `#` symbols in a path
      * Unicode symbols in domain names are allowed (though not universally supported) through a peculiar encoding technique called “[Punycode](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc3492.txt)”
  * Traditionally, different casings are used in different parts of an HTTP request:
      * `kebab-case`in domains, headers, and paths
      * `snake_case` in query parameters
      * `snake_case` or `camelCase` in request bodies.

      Furthermore, using both `snake_case` and `camelCase` in domain names is impossible as the underscore sign is not allowed and capital letters will be lowercased during URL normalization.

Theoretically, it is possible to use `kebab-case` everywhere. However, most programming languages do not allow variable names and object fields in `kebab-case`, so working with such an API would be quite inconvenient.

To wrap this up, the situation with casing is so spoiled and convoluted that there is no consistent solution to employ. In this book, we follow this rule: tokens are cased according to the common practice for the corresponding request component. If a token's position changes, the casing is changed as well. (However, we're far from recommending following this approach unconditionally. Our recommendation is rather to try to avoid increasing the entropy by choosing a solution that minimizes the probability of misunderstanding.)

**NB**: strictly speaking, JSON stands for “JavaScript Object Notation,” and in JavaScript, the default casing is `camelCase`. However, we dare to say that JSON ceased to be a format bound to JavaScript long ago and is now a universal format for organizing communication between agents written in different programming languages. Employing `camel_case` allows for easily moving a parameter from a query to a body, which is the most frequent case. Although the inverse solution (i.e., using `camelCase` in query parameter names) is also possible.