### Defining an Application Field

Key question you should ask yourself looks like that: what problem we solve? It should be asked four times, each time putting an emphasis on an another word.

  1. *What* problem we solve? Could we clearly outline the situation in which our hypothetical API is needed by developers?

  2. What *problem* we solve? Are we sure that abovementioned situation poses a problem? Does someone really want to pay (literally or figuratively) to automate a solution for this problem?

  3. What problem *we* solve? Do we actually possess an expertise to solve the problem?

  4. What problem we *solve*? Is it true that the solution we propose solves the problem indeed? Aren't we creating another problem instead?

So, let's imagine that we are going to develop an API for automated coffee ordering in city cafes, and let's apply the key question to it.

  1. Why would someone need an API to make a coffee? Why ordering a coffee via ‘human-to-human’ or ‘human-to-machine’ interface is inconvenient, why have ‘machine-to-machine’ interface?
    * Possibly, we're solving knowledge and selection problems? To provide humans with a full knowledge what options they have right now and right here.
    * Possibly, we're optimizing waiting times? To save the time people waste waiting their beverages.
    * Possibly, we're reducing the number of errors? To help people get exactly what they wanted to order, stop losing information in imprecise conversational communication or in dealing with unfamiliar coffee machine interfaces?

  ‘Why’ question is the most important of all questions you must ask yourself. And not only about global project goals, but also locally about every single piece of functionality. **If you can't briefly and clearly answer the question ‘what for this entity is needed’, then it's not needed**.
  
  Here and throughout we assume, to make our example more complex and bizarre, that we are optimizing all three factors.

  2. Do the problems we outlined really exist? Do we really observe unequal coffee-machines utilization in mornings? Do people really suffer from inability to find nearby a toffee nut latte they long for? Do they really care about minutes they spend in lines?

  3. Do we actually have a resource to solve a problem? Do we have an access to sufficient number of coffee machines and users to ensure system's efficiency?

  4. Finally, will we really solve a problem? How we're going to quantify an impact our API makes? 

In general, there are no simple answers to those questions. Ideally, you should give answers having all the relevant metrics measured: how much time is wasted exactly, and what numbers we're going to achieve providing we have such coffee machines density? Let us also stress that in a real life obtaining these numbers is only possible if you're entering a stable market. If you try to create something new, your only option is to rely on your intuition.

#### Why an API?

Since our book is dedicated not to software development per se, but to developing APIs, we should look at all those questions from a different angle: why solving those problems specifically requires an API, not simply a specialized software application? In terms of our fictional example we should ask ourselves: why provide a service to developers, allowing for brewing coffee to end users, instead of just making an app?

In other words, there must be a solid reason to split two software development domains: there are the operators which provide APIs; and there are the operators which develop services for end users. Their interests are somehow different to such an extent, that coupling this two roles in one entity is undesirable. We will talk about the motivation to specifically provide APIs in more details in Section III.

We should also note, that you should try making an API when and only when you wrote ‘because that's our area of expertise’ in question 2. Developing APIs is sort of meta-engineering: you're writing some software to allow other companies to develop software to solve users' problems. You must possess an expertise in both domains (APIs and user products) to design your API well.

As for our speculative example, let us imagine that in the near future some tectonic shift happened within coffee brewing market. Two distinct player groups took shape: some companies provide a ‘hardware’, i.e. coffee machines; other companies have an access to customer auditory. Something like the flights market looks like: there are air companies, which actually transport passengers; and there are trip planning services where users are choosing between trip variants the system generates for them. We're aggregating a hardware access to allow app vendors for ordering the fresh brewed coffee.

#### What and How

After finishing all these theoretical exercises, we should proceed right to designing and developing the API, having a decent understanding regarding two things:
  * *what* we're doing, exactly;
  * *how* we're doing it, exactly.

In our coffee case, we are:
  * providing an API to services with larger audience, so their users may order a cup of coffee in the most efficient and convenient manner;
  * abstracting an access to coffee machines ‘hardware’ and delivering methods to select a beverage kind and some location to brew — and to make an order.
