### [Isolating Responsibility Areas][api-design-isolating-responsibility]

In the previous chapter, we concluded that the hierarchy of abstractions in our hypothetical project would comprise:
  * The user level (the entities formulated in terms understandable by users and acted upon by them: orders, coffee recipes)
  * The program execution control level (the entities responsible for transforming orders into machine commands)
  * The runtime level for the second API kind (the entities describing the command execution state machine).

We are now to define each entity's responsibility area: what's the reasoning for keeping this entity within our API boundaries? What operations are applicable to the entity directly (and which are delegated to other objects)? In fact, we are to apply the “why”-principle to every single API entity.

To do so, we must iterate all over the API and formulate in subject area terms what every object is. Let us remind that the abstraction levels concept implies that each level is some interim subject area per se; a step we take in the journey from describing a task in terms belonging to the first connected context (“a lungo ordered by a user”) to terms belonging to the second connected context (“a command performed by a coffee machine”).

As for our fictional example, it would look as follows.
  1. User-level entities.
      * An `order` describes some logical unit in app-user interaction. An `order` might be:
        * Created
        * Checked for its status
        * Retrieved
        * Canceled.
      * A `recipe` describes an “ideal model” of a coffee beverage type, i.e., its customer properties. A `recipe` is an immutable entity that can only be read.
      * A `coffee-machine` is a model of a real-world device. We must be able to retrieve the coffee machine's geographical location and the options it supports from this model (which will be discussed below).
  2. Program execution control-level entities.
      * A `program` describes a general execution plan for a coffee machine. Programs can only be read.
      * The `programs/matcher` entity couples a `recipe` and a `program`, which in fact means retrieving a dataset needed to prepare a specific recipe on a specific coffee machine.
      * The `programs/run` entity describes a single fact of running a program on a coffee machine. A `run` might be:
        * Initialized (created)
        * Checked for its status
        * Canceled.
  3. Runtime-level entities.
      * A `runtime` describes a specific execution data context, i.e., the state of each variable. A `runtime` can be:
        * Initialized (created)
        * Checked for its status
        * Terminated.

If we look closely at the entities, we may notice that each entity turns out to be a composite. For example, a `program` operates high-level data (`recipe` and `coffee-machine`), enhancing them with its subject area terms (`program_run_id` for instance). This is totally fine as connecting contexts is what APIs do.

#### Use Case Scenarios

At this point, when our API is in general clearly outlined and drafted, we must put ourselves in the developer's shoes and try writing code. Our task is to look at the entity nomenclature and make some guesses regarding their future usage.

So, let us imagine we've got a task to write an app for ordering coffee based on our API. What code would we write?

Obviously, the first step is to offer a choice to the user, to make them point out what they want. And this very first step reveals that our API is quite inconvenient. There are no methods allowing for choosing something. Developers have to implement these steps:
  * Retrieve all possible recipes from the `GET /v1/recipes` endpoint
  * Retrieve a list of all available coffee machines from the `GET /v1/coffee-machines` endpoint
  * Write code that traverses all this data.

If we try writing pseudocode, we will get something like this:

```
// Retrieve all possible recipes
let recipes = 
  api.getRecipes();
// Retrieve a list of 
// all available coffee machines
let coffeeMachines = 
  api.getCoffeeMachines();
// Build a spatial index
let coffeeMachineRecipesIndex = 
  buildGeoIndex(
    recipes, 
    coffeeMachines
  );
// Select coffee machines 
// matching user's needs
let matchingCoffeeMachines = 
  coffeeMachineRecipesIndex.query(
    parameters,
    { "sort_by": "distance" }
  );
// Finally, show offers to the user
app.display(matchingCoffeeMachines);
```

As you see, developers are to write a lot of redundant code (to say nothing about the complexity of implementing spatial indexes). Besides, if we take into consideration our Napoleonic plans to cover all coffee machines in the world with our API, then we need to admit that this algorithm is just a waste of computational resources on retrieving lists and indexing them.

The necessity of adding a new endpoint for searching becomes obvious. To design such an interface we must imagine ourselves being UX designers, and think about how an app could try to arouse users' interest. Two scenarios are evident:
  * Display all cafes in the vicinity and the types of coffee they offer (a “service discovery” scenario) — for new users or just users with no specific preferences
  * Display nearby cafes where a user could order a particular type of coffee — for users seeking a certain beverage type.

Then our new interface would look like this:

```
POST /v1/offers/search
{
  // optional
  "recipes": ["lungo", "americano"],
  "position": <geographical coordinates>,
  "sort_by": [
    { "field": "distance" }
  ],
  "limit": 10
}
→
{
  "results": [
    { 
      "coffee_machine", 
      "place", 
      "distance", 
      "offer" 
    }
  ],
  "cursor"
}
```

Here:
  * An `offer` is a marketing bid: on what conditions a user could have the requested coffee beverage (if specified in the request), or some kind of marketing offer — prices for the most popular or interesting products (if no specific preference was set).
  * A `place` is a spot (café, restaurant, street vending machine) where the coffee machine is located. We never introduced this entity before, but it's quite obvious that users need more convenient guidance to find a proper coffee machine than just geographical coordinates.

**NB**: we could have enriched the existing `/coffee-machines` endpoint instead of adding a new one. Although this decision looks less semantically viable, coupling different modes of listing entities in one interface, by relevance and by order, is usually a bad idea because these two types of rankings imply different features and usage scenarios. Furthermore, enriching the search with “offers” pulls this functionality out of the `coffee-machines` namespace: the fact of getting offers to prepare specific beverages in specific conditions is a key feature for users, with specifying the coffee machine being just a part of an offer. In reality, users rarely care about coffee machine models.

**NB**: having `coffee_machine_id` in the interface is to some extent violating the abstraction separation principle. It should be organized in a more complex way: coffee shops should somehow map incoming orders against available coffee machines, and only the type of the coffee machine (if a coffee shop really operates several of them) is something meaningful in the context of order creation. However, we deliberately simplified our study by making a coffee machine selectable in the API to keep our API example readable.

Coming back to the code developers write, it would now look like that:

```
// Searching for offers
// matching a user's intent
let offers = api.search(parameters);
// Display them to a user
app.display(offers);
```

#### Helpers

Methods similar to the newly invented `offers/search` one are called helpers. The purpose of their existence is to generalize known API usage scenarios and facilitate their implementation. By “facilitating,” we mean not only reducing wordiness (getting rid of “boilerplates”) but also helping developers avoid common problems and mistakes.

For instance, let's consider the problem of the monetary value of an order. Our search function returns some “offers” with prices. However, the price is volatile; coffee could cost less during “happy hours,” for example. Developers could make a mistake three times while implementing this functionality:
  * Cache search results on a client device for too long (as a result, the price will always be outdated).
  * Contrary to the previous point, call the search endpoint excessively just to actualize prices, thus overloading the network and the API servers.
  * Create an order with an invalid price (thereby deceiving a user, displaying one sum, and debiting another).

To solve the third problem we could demand that the displayed price be included in the order creation request and return an error if it differs from the actual one. (In fact, any API working with money *must* do so.) However, this solution does not help with the first two problems, and also deteriorates the user experience. Displaying the actual price is always a much more convenient behavior than displaying errors upon pressing the “place an order” button.

One solution is to provide a special identifier to an offer. This identifier must be specified in an order creation request:

```
{
  "results": [
    {
      "coffee_machine", 
      "place", 
      "distance",
      "offer": {
        "id",
        "price",
        "currency_code",
        // Date and time 
        // when the offer expires
        "valid_until"
      }
    }
  ],
  "cursor"
}
```
By doing so we're not only helping developers grasp the concept of getting the relevant price but also solving a UX task of informing users about “happy hours.”

As an alternative, we could split the endpoints: one for searching, and one for obtaining offers. The second endpoint would only be needed to actualize prices if necessary.

#### Error Handling

And one more step towards making developers' lives easier: what would an “invalid price” error look like?

```
POST /v1/orders
{ "offer_id", … }
→ 409 Conflict
{ "message": "Invalid price" }
```

Formally speaking, this error response is sufficient: users get the “Invalid price” message, and they have to repeat the order. But from a UX point of view, this would be a terrible decision: the user hasn't made any mistakes, and this message isn't helpful at all.

The main rule of error interfaces in APIs is that an error response must help a client understand *what to do with the error*. An error response's content must address the following questions:

  1. Which party is the source of the problem: the client or the server? For example, HTTP APIs traditionally employ the `4xx` status codes to indicate client problems and `5xx` to indicate server problems (with the exception of the `404` code, which is an uncertainty status).
  2. If the error is caused by the server, is there any sense in repeating the request? If yes, then when?
  3. If the error is caused by the client, is it resolvable or not?  
    For example, the invalid price error is resolvable: a client could obtain a new price offer and create a new order with it. But if the error occurred because of a mistake in the client code, then eliminating the cause is impossible, and there is no need to make the user press the “place an order” button again: this request will never succeed.  
    **NB**: here and throughout we indicate resolvable problems with the `409 Conflict` code and unresolvable ones with the `400 Bad Request` code.
  4. If the error is resolvable then what kind of problem is it? Obviously, application engineers couldn't resolve a problem they are unaware of. For every resolvable problem, developers must *write some code* (re-obtaining the offer in our case), so there must be a list of possible error reasons and the corresponding fields in the error response to tell one problem from another.
  5. If passing invalid values in different parameters arises the same kind of error, then how to learn which parameter value is wrong exactly?
  6. Finally, if some parameter value is unacceptable, then what values are acceptable?

In our case, the price mismatch error should look like this:

```
409 Conflict
{
  // Error kind
  "reason": "offer_invalid",
  "localized_message":
    "Something went wrong.⮠
     Try restarting the app."
  "details": {
    // What's wrong exactly?
    // Which validity checks failed?
    "checks_failed": [
      "offer_lifetime"
    ]
  }
}
```

After receiving this error, a client should check the error's kind (“some problem with the offer”) and the specific error reason (“order lifetime expired”), and send the offer retrieval request again. If the `checks_failed` field indicated a different error reason (for example, the offer isn't bound to the specified user), client actions would be different (re-authorize the user, then get a new offer). If there was no error handler for this specific reason, a client should show the `localized_message` to the user and invoke the standard error recovery procedure.

It is also worth mentioning that unresolvable errors are useless to a user at the time of the error occurrence (since the client couldn't react meaningfully to unknown errors). Still, providing extended error data is not excessive as a developer will read it while fixing the issue in their code.

#### Decomposing Interfaces. The “7±2” Rule

From our own API development experience, we can tell without a doubt that the greatest final interface design mistake (and the greatest developer's pain accordingly) is the excessive overloading of entities' interfaces with fields, methods, events, parameters, and other attributes.

Meanwhile, there is the “Golden Rule” of interface design (applicable not only to APIs but almost to anything): humans can comfortably keep 7±2 entities in short-term memory. Manipulating a larger number of chunks complicates things for most humans. The rule is also known as [Miller's Law](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Working_memory#Capacity).

The only possible method of overcoming this law is decomposition. Entities should be grouped under a single designation at every concept level of the API so that developers never have to operate on more than a reasonable amount of entities (let's say, ten) at a time.

Let's take a look at the coffee machine search function response in our API. To ensure an adequate UX of the app, quite bulky datasets are required:

```
{
  "results": [{
    // Coffee machine data
    "coffee_machine_id",
    "coffee_machine_type",
    "coffee_machine_brand",
    // Place data
    "place_name": "The Chamomile",
    "place_location_latitude",
    "place_location_longitude",
    "place_open_now",
    "working_hours",
    // Walking route parameters
    "walking_distance",
    "walking_time",
    // How to find the place
    "location_tip",
    // Offers
    "offers": [{
      // Recipe data
      "recipe",
      "recipe_name",
      "recipe_description",
      // Order parameters
      "volume",
      // Offer data
      "offer_id",
      "offer_valid_until",
      "price": "19.00",
      "localized_price": 
        "Just $19 for a large coffee cup",
      "currency_code",
      "estimated_waiting_time"
    }, …]
  }, …]
}
```

This approach is regretfully quite common and could be found in almost every API. Fields are mixed into one single list and often prefixed to indicate the related ones.

In this situation, we need to split this structure into data domains by grouping fields that are logically related to a single subject area. In our case, we may identify at least 7 data clusters:
  * Data regarding the place where the coffee machine is located
  * Properties of the coffee machine itself
  * Route data
  * Recipe data
  * Order options
  * Offer data
  * Pricing data.

Let's group them together:

```
{
  "results": [{
    // Place data
    "place": { "name", "location" },
    // Coffee machine properties
    "coffee-machine": { 
      "id", "brand", "type" 
    },
    // Route data
    "route": { 
      "distance", 
      "duration", 
      "location_tip" 
    },
    "offers": [{
      // Recipe data
      "recipe": { 
        "id", 
        "name", 
        "description" 
      },
      // Order options
      "options": 
        { "volume" },
      // Offer metadata
      "offer": 
        { "id", "valid_until" },
      // Pricing
      "pricing": { 
        "currency_code", 
        "price", 
        "localized_price" 
      },
      "estimated_waiting_time"
    }, …]
  }, …]
}
```

Such a decomposed API is much easier to read than a long list of different attributes. Furthermore, it's probably better to group even more entities in advance. For example, a `place` and a `route` could be nested fields under a synthetic `location` property, or `offer` and `pricing` fields might be combined into some generalized object.

It is important to say that readability is achieved not only by merely grouping the entities. Decomposing must be performed in such a manner that a developer, while reading the interface, instantly understands, “Here is the place description of no interest to me right now, no need to traverse deeper.” If the data fields needed to complete some action are scattered all over different composites, the readability doesn't improve and even degrades.

Proper decomposition also helps with extending and evolving an API. We'll discuss the subject in Section III.
