### [The Backward Compatibility Problem Statement][back-compat-statement]

As usual, let's conceptually define “backward compatibility” before we start.

Backward compatibility is a feature of the entire API system to be stable in time. It means the following: **the code that developers have written using your API continues to work functionally correctly for a long period of time**. There are two important questions regarding this definition and two explanations:

  1. What does “functionally correctly” mean?

      It means that the code continues to serve its intended function which is to solve users' problems. It does not necessarily mean that it continues to work indistinguishably from the previous version. For example, if you're maintaining a UI library, making functionally insignificant design changes like adjusting shadow depth or border stroke type would still be considered backward-compatible unlike changing the sizes of the visual components.

  2. What does “a long period of time” mean?

      From our point of view, the backward compatibility maintenance period should be aligned with the typical lifetime of applications in the subject area. Platform LTS (Long-Term Support) periods can serve as helpful guidelines in most cases. Since applications will be rewritten when the platform maintenance period ends, it is reasonable to expect developers to transition to the new API version as well. In mainstream subject areas such as desktop and mobile operating systems, this period typically spans several years.

The definition makes it evident why maintaining backward compatibility is crucial, including taking necessary measures at the API design stage. An outage, whether full or partial, caused by an API vendor, is an extremely inconvenient situation for every developer, if not a disaster — especially if they are paying for the API usage.

But let's take a look at the problem from another angle: why does the problem of maintaining backward compatibility exist in the first place? Why would anyone *want* to break it? This question, though it may seem trivial, is much more complicated than the previous one.

We could say that *we break backward compatibility to introduce new features to the API*. However, this would be deceiving since new features are called *“new”* for a reason — they cannot affect existing implementations that do not use them. We must admit that there are several associated problems that lead to the aspiration to rewrite *our* code, the code of the API itself, and ship a new major version:

  * The codebase eventually becomes outdated making it impractical to introduce changes or even new functionality
  * The old interfaces are not suited to accommodate new features. We would love to extend existing functionality with new properties, but we simply cannot
  * Finally, with years passing since the initial release, we have gained a better understanding of the subject area and API best practices. We would implement many things differently now.

These arguments can be summarized frankly as “API vendors do not want to support old code.” However, this explanation is still incomplete. If you're not planning to rewrite the API code to add new functionality or even if you're not planning to add it at all, you still need to release new API versions, both minor and major.

**NB**: In this chapter, we don't make any difference between minor versions and patches. “Minor version” means any backward-compatible API release.

Let us remind the reader that [an API is a bridge](#intro-api-definition), a means of connecting different programmable contexts. No matter how strong our desire is to keep the bridge intact, our capabilities are limited: we can lock the bridge, but we cannot command the rifts and the canyon itself. That's the source of the problem: we can't guarantee that *our own* code won't change. So at some point, we will have to ask the clients to rewrite *their* code.

Apart from our aspirations to change the API architecture, three other tectonic processes are happening at the same time: user agents, subject areas, and the erosion of underlying platforms.

##### The Fragmentation of Consumer Applications

When you shipped the very first API version, and the initial clients started using it, the situation was perfect. However, this perfection doesn't last, and two scenarios are possible.

  1. If the platform allows for fetching code on-demand, like the good old Web does, and you weren't too lazy to implement that code-on-demand feature (in the form of a platform SDK, such as JS API), then the evolution of your API is more or less under your control. Maintaining backward compatibility effectively means keeping *the client library* backward-compatible. As for client-server interaction, you have freedom.

      This doesn't mean that you can't break backward compatibility. You can still make a mistake with cache-control headers or simply overlook a bug in the code. Additionally, even code-on-demand systems don't get updated instantly. The author of this book faced a situation where users deliberately kept a browser tab open *for weeks* to avoid updates. However, in general, you usually don't have to support more than two API versions — the latest one and the penultimate one. Furthermore, you may consider rewriting the previous major version of the library, implementing it on top of the actual API version.

  2. If the code-on-demand feature isn't supported or is prohibited by the platform, as is the case with modern mobile operating systems, the situation becomes more severe. Each client effectively borrows a snapshot of the code that works with your API, frozen at the moment of compilation. Client application updates are scattered over time to a much greater extent than Web application updates. The most painful aspect is that *some clients will never be up to date*, due to one of three reasons:
      
        * Developers simply don't want to update the app, i.e., its development has stopped.
        * Users do not want to get updates (sometimes because they believe that developers “spoiled” the app in new versions)
        * Users cannot get updates because their devices are no longer supported.
    
      In modern times these three categories combined could easily constitute a significant portion (tens of percent) of the audience. This implies that discontinuing support for any API version could be a nightmare experience  — especially if partners' apps continue supporting a broader range of platforms than the API does.

      If you have never issued an SDK, providing only server-side APIs, for example in the form of HTTP endpoints, you might think that the backward compatibility problem is mitigated, although your API is less competitive on the market due to the lack of SDKs. However, that's not what will happen. If you don't provide an SDK, developers will either adopt an unofficial one (if someone bothered to create it) or write a framework themselves, independently. The “your framework — your problems” strategy, fortunately or unfortunately, works poorly. If developers write low-quality code on top of your API, then your API itself is of low quality — definitely in the view of developers and possibly in the view of end-users if the API's performance within the app is visible to them.

Certainly, if you provide stateless APIs that don't require client SDKs or can be auto-generated from the spec, these problems will be much less noticeable. However, they are not fully avoidable unless you never issue any new API versions. If you do, you will still have to deal with some fragmentation of users by API and SDK versions.

##### Subject Area Evolution

The other side of the canyon is the underlying functionality that you expose via the API. It is, of course, not static and evolves in the following ways:

  * New functionality emerges
  * Older functionality shuts down
  * Interfaces change.

As usual, the API provides an abstraction to a much more granular subject area. In the case of our coffee machine API example, one might reasonably expect new machine models to emerge, which will need to be supported by the platform. New models often come with new APIs, making it challenging to ensure their adoption while preserving the same high-level API. In any case, the API's code needs to be altered, which may lead to incompatibility, albeit unintentionally.

Let us also emphasize that vendors of low-level APIs are not always as committed to maintaining backward compatibility for their APIs (or any software they provide) as we hope you are. It is important to be aware that keeping your API in an operational state, which involves writing and supporting facades to the shifting subject area landscape, will be your responsibility, sometimes posing quite sudden challenges.

##### Platform Drift

Finally, there is a third aspect to consider — the “canyon” you are crossing over with a bridge of your API. Developers write code that is executed in an environment beyond your control, and it evolves. New versions of operating systems, browsers, protocols, and programming language SDKs emerge. New standards are being developed and new arrangements are made, some of which are backward-incompatible, and there is nothing that can be done about that.

Older platform versions contribute to fragmentation just like older app versions as developers (including the API developers) struggle to support older platforms. At the same time, users face challenges with platform updates. In many cases, they are unable to update their devices to newer platform versions since newer platform versions require newer devices.

The most challenging aspect here is that not only does incremental progress, in the form of new platforms and protocols, necessitate changes to the API, but also the vulgar influence of trends. Several years ago realistic 3D icons were popular, but since then, public taste has changed in favor of flat and abstract ones. UI component developers had to follow the fashion, rebuilding their libraries by either shipping new icons or replacing the old ones. Similarly, the current trend of integrating the “night mode” feature has become widespread, demanding changes in a wide range of APIs.

#### Backward-Compatible Specifications

In the case of the API-first approach, the backward compatibility problem adds another dimension: the specification and code generation based on it. It becomes possible to break backward compatibility without breaking the spec (for example, by introducing eventual consistency instead of strict consistency) — and vice versa, modify the spec in a backward-incompatible manner without changing anything in the protocol and therefore not affecting existing integrations at all (for example, by replacing `additionalProperties: false` with `true` in OpenAPI).

The question of whether two specification versions are backward-compatible or not belongs to a gray zone, as specification standards themselves do not define this. Generally speaking, the statement “specification change is backward-compatible” is equivalent to “any client code written or generated based on the previous version of the spec continues to work correctly after the API vendor releases the new API version implementing the new version of the spec.” Practically speaking, following this definition seems quite unrealistic for two reasons: it is impossible to learn the behavior of every piece of code-generating software out there (for instance, it's rather hard to say whether code generated based on a specification that includes the parameter `additionalProperties: false` will still function properly if the server starts returning additional fields).

Thus, using IDLs to describe APIs with all the advantages they undeniably bring to the field, leads to having one aspect of the technology drift problem: the IDL version and, more importantly, versions of helper software based on it, are constantly and sometimes unpredictably evolving. If an API vendor employs the “code-first” approach, meaning that the spec is generated based on the actual API code, the occurrence of backward-incompatible changes in the server code — spec — code-generated SDK — client app chain is only a matter of time.

**NB**: We recommend sticking to reasonable practices such as not using functionality that is controversial from a backward compatibility point of view (including the above-mentioned `additionalProperties: false`) and when evaluating the safety of changes, considering spec-generated code behaves just like manually written code. If you find yourself in a situation of unresolvable doubts, your only option is to manually check every code generator to determine whether its output continues to work with the new version of the API.

#### Backward Compatibility Policy

To summarize the points discussed above:
  * You will have to deploy new API versions because of the evolution of apps, platforms, and subject areas. Different areas evolve at different paces but never stop doing so.
  * This will result in the fragmentation of the API versions across different platforms and apps.
  * You have to make decisions that greatly affect the sustainability of your API from your customers' perspective.

Let's briefly describe these decisions and the key factors to consider while making them.

  1. How often should new major API versions be released?

      This is primarily a *product* question. A new major API version should be released when a critical mass of functionality is reached, meaning a critical mass of features that couldn't be introduced in the previous API versions or would be too expensive to introduce. In stable markets, this situation typically occurs once every several years. In emerging markets, new major API versions might be shipped more frequently, depending only on your ability to support the zoo of the previous versions. However, it is important to note that deploying a new version before stabilizing the previous one, which commonly takes several months up to a year, is always a troubling sign to developers, as it means they risk dealing with API glitches permanently.

  2. How many *major* versions should be supported simultaneously?

      *Theoretically*, all of them. *Practically*, you should look at the size of the audience that continues to use older versions and develop guidelines on when the support for those versions will end.

  3. How many *minor* versions (within one major version) should be supported simultaneously?

      Regarding minor versions, there are two options:
        
        * If you provide server-side APIs and compiled SDKs only, you may basically choose not to expose minor versions at all (see below). However, at some maturity stage, providing access to at least the two latest versions becomes necessary.
        * If you provide code-on-demand SDKs, it is considered good practice to provide access to previous minor versions of the SDK for a period of time sufficient for developers to test their applications and address issues if necessary. Since minor changes do not require rewriting large portions of code, it is acceptable to align the lifecycle of a minor version with the app release cycle duration in your industry, which in the worst cases may comprise several months.

#### Keeping Several API Versions

In modern professional software development, especially when talking about internal APIs, a new API version usually fully replaces the previous one. If any problems are found, it might be rolled back by releasing the previous version, but the two builds never coexist. However, in the case of public APIs, the more partner integrations there are, the more dangerous this approach becomes.

Indeed, with the growth in the number of users, the “rollback the API version in case of problems” paradigm becomes increasingly destructive. For partners, the optimal solution is rigidly referencing the specific API version — the one that had been tested (ideally, while also having the API vendor seamlessly address security concerns and make their software compliant with newly introduced legislation).

**NB**: Based on the same considerations, providing beta (or maybe even alpha) versions of popular APIs becomes more and more desirable as well, allowing partners to test upcoming versions and address possible issues in advance.

The important (and undeniable) advantage of the *semver* system is that it provides proper version granularity:

  * Stating the first digit (major version) allows obtaining a backward-compatible version of the API.
  * stating two digits (major and minor versions) guarantees that functionality added after the initial release will be available.
  * Finally, stating all three numbers (major version, minor version, and patch) allows fixing a concrete API release with all its specificities (and errors), which — theoretically — means that the integration will remain operational until this version becomes physically unavailable.

Of course, preserving minor versions indefinitely is not possible (partly because of security and compliance issues that tend to accumulate). However, providing such access for a reasonable period of time is considered a hygienic norm for popular APIs.

**NB**: Sometimes to defend the concept of a single accessible API version, the following argument is put forward: preserving the SDK or API application server code is not enough to maintain strict backward compatibility as it might rely on some unversioned services (for example, data in the DB shared between all API versions). However, we consider this an additional reason to isolate such dependencies (see “[The Serenity Notepad](#back-compat-serenity-notepad)” chapter) as it means that changes to these subsystems might result in the API becoming inoperable.