### [Interfaces as a Universal Pattern][back-compat-universal-interfaces]

Let us summarize what we have written in the three previous chapters:

  1. Extending API functionality is implemented through abstracting: the entity nomenclature is to be reinterpreted so that existing methods become partial simplified cases of more general functionality, ideally representing the most frequent scenarios.
  2. Higher-level entities are to be the informational contexts for low-level ones, meaning they don't prescribe any specific behavior but rather translate their state and expose functionality to modify it, either directly through calling some methods or indirectly through firing events.
  3. Concrete functionality, such as working with “bare metal” hardware or underlying platform APIs, should be delegated to low-level entities.

**NB**: There is nothing novel about these rules: one might easily recognize them as the *SOLID* architecture principles[ref SOLID](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/SOLID)[ref:{"short":"Martin, R. C.","extra":["Design Principles and Design Patterns"]}](http://staff.cs.utu.fi/~jounsmed/doos_06/material/DesignPrinciplesAndPatterns.pdf). This is not surprising either, as *SOLID* focuses on contract-oriented development, and APIs are contracts by definition. We have simply introduced the concepts of “abstraction levels” and “informational contexts” to these principles.

However, there remains an unanswered question: how should we design the entity nomenclature from the beginning so that extending the API won't result in a mess of assorted inconsistent methods from different stages of development? The answer is quite obvious: to avoid clumsy situations during abstracting (as with the recipe properties), all the entities must be originally considered as specific implementations of a more general interface, even if there are no planned alternative implementations for them.

For example, while designing the `POST /search` API, we should have asked ourselves a question: what is a “search result”? What abstract interface does it implement? To answer this question we need to decompose this entity neatly and identify which facet of it is used for interacting with which objects.

Then we would have come to the understanding that a “search result” is actually a composition of two interfaces:
  * When creating an order, we need the search result to provide fields that describe the order itself, which could be a structure like:
      
       `{coffee_machine_id, recipe_id, volume, currency_code, price}`,

       or we can encode this data in the single `offer_id`.
  
  * When displaying search results in the app, we need a different data set: `name`, `description`, and formatted and localized prices.

So our interface (let's call it `ISearchResult`) is actually a composition of two other interfaces: `IOrderParameters` (an entity that allows for creating an order) and `ISearchItemViewParameters` (an abstract representation of the search result in the UI). This interface split should naturally lead us to additional questions:

  1. How will we couple the former and the latter? Obviously, these two sub-interfaces are related: the machine-readable price must match the human-readable one, for example. This will naturally lead us to the “formatter” concept described in the “[Strong Coupling and Related Problems](#back-compat-strong-coupling)” chapter.

  2. And what constitutes the “abstract representation of a search result in the UI”? Do we have other types of search? Should the `ISearchItemViewParameters` interface be a subtype of some even more general interface, or maybe a composition of several such interfaces?

Replacing specific implementations with interfaces not only allows us to respond more clearly to many concerns that arise during the API design phase but also helps us outline many possible directions for API evolution. This approach should assist us in avoiding API inconsistency problems in the future.