### [The Serenity Notepad][back-compat-serenity-notepad]

Apart from the abovementioned abstract principles, let us give a list of concrete recommendations: how to make changes in existing APIs to maintain backward compatibility

##### Remember the Iceberg's Waterline

If you haven't given any formal guarantee, it doesn't mean that you can violate informal ones. Often, just fixing bugs in APIs might render some developers' code inoperable. We might illustrate it with a real-life example that the author of this book has actually faced once:
  * there was an API to place a button into a visual container; according to the docs, it was taking its position (offsets to the container's corner) as a mandatory argument;
  * in reality, there was a bug: if the position was not supplied, no exception was thrown; buttons were simply stacked in the corner one after another;
  * after the error had been fixed, we got a bunch of complaints: clients did really use this flaw to stack the buttons in the container's corner.

If fixing an error might somehow affect real customers, you have no other choice but to emulate this erroneous behavior until the next major release. This situation is quite common if you develop a large API with a huge audience. For example, operating systems developers literally have to transfer old bugs to new OS versions.

##### Test the Formal Interface

Any software must be tested, and APIs ain't an exclusion. However, there are some subtleties there: as APIs provide formal interfaces, it's the formal interfaces that are needed to be tested. That leads to several kinds of mistakes:

  1. Often the requirements like “the `getEntity` function returns the value previously being set by the `setEntity` function” appear to be too trivial to both developers and QA engineers to have a proper test. But it's quite possible to make a mistake there, and we have actually encountered such bugs several times.
  2. The interface abstraction principle must be tested either. In theory, you might have considered each entity as an implementation of some interface; in practice, it might happen that you have forgotten something and alternative implementations aren't actually possible. For testing purposes, it's highly desirable to have an alternative realization, even a provisional one, for every interface.

##### Isolate the Dependencies

In the case of a gateway API that provides access to some underlying API or aggregates several APIs behind a single façade, there is a strong temptation to proxy the original interface as is, thus not introducing any changes to it and making life much simpler by sparing an effort needed to implement the weak-coupled interaction between services. For example, while developing program execution interfaces as described in the “[Separating Abstraction Levels](#api-design-separating-abstractions)” chapter we might have taken the existing first-kind coffee-machine API as a role model and provided it in our API by just proxying the requests and responses as is. Doing so is highly undesirable because of several reasons:
  * usually, you have no guarantees that the partner will maintain backward compatibility or at least keep new versions more or less conceptually akin to the older ones;
  * any partner's problem will automatically ricochet into your customers.

The best practice is quite the opposite: isolate the third-party API usage, i.e., develop an abstraction level that will allow for:
  * keeping backward compatibility intact because of extension capabilities incorporated in the API design;
  * negating partner's problems by technical means:
      * limiting the partner's API usage in case of load surges;
      * implementing the retry policies or other methods of recovering after failures;
      * caching some data and states to have the ability to provide some (at least partial) functionality even if the partner's API is fully unreachable;
      * finally, configuring an automatic fallback to another partner or alternative API.

##### Implement Your API Functionality Atop Public Interfaces

There is an antipattern that occurs frequently: API developers use some internal closed implementations of some methods which exist in the public API. It happens because of two reasons:
  * often the public API is just an addition to the existing specialized software, and the functionality, exposed via the API, isn't being ported back to the closed part of the project, or the public API developers simply don't know the corresponding internal functionality exists;
  * in the course of extending the API, some interfaces become abstract, but the existing functionality isn't affected; imagine that while implementing the `PUT /formatters` interface described in the “[Strong Coupling and Related Problems](#back-compat-strong-coupling)” chapter API developers have created a new, more general version of the volume formatter but hasn't changed the implementation of the existing one, so it continues working for pre-existing languages.

There are obvious local problems with this approach (like the inconsistency in functions' behavior, or the bugs which were not found while testing the code), but also a bigger one: your API might be simply unusable if a developer tries any non-mainstream approach, because of performance issues, bugs, instability, etc., as the API developers themselves never tried to use this public interface for anything important.

**NB**. The perfect example of avoiding this anti-pattern is the development of compilers; usually, the next compiler's version is compiled with the previous compiler's version.

##### Keep a Notepad

Whatever tips and tricks described in the previous chapters you use, it's often quite probable that you can't do *anything* to prevent API inconsistencies from piling up. It's possible to reduce the speed of this stockpiling, foresee some problems, and have some interface durability reserved for future use. But one can't foresee *everything*. At this stage, many developers tend to make some rash decisions, e.g., releasing a backwards-incompatible minor version to fix some design flaws.

We highly recommend never doing that. Remember that the API is also a multiplier of your mistakes. What we recommend is to keep a serenity notepad — to write down the lessons learned, and not to forget to apply this knowledge when a new major API version is released.
