### [On the Content of This Section][sdks-toc]

As we mentioned in the Introduction, the term “SDK” (which stands for “Software Development Kit”) lacks concrete meaning. The common understanding is that an SDK differs from an API as it provides both program interfaces and tools to work with them. This definition is hardly satisfactory as today any technology is likely to be provided with a bundled toolset.

However, there is a very specific narrow definition of an SDK: it is a client library that provides a high-level interface (usually a native one) to some underlying platform (such as a client-server API). Most often, we talk about libraries for mobile OSes or Web browsers that work on top of a general-purpose HTTP API.

Among such client SDKs, one case is of particular interest to us: those libraries that not only provide programmatic interfaces to work with an API but also offer ready-to-use visual components for developers. A classic example of such an SDK is the UI libraries provided by cartographical services. Since developing a map engine, especially a vector one, is a very complex task, maps API vendors provide both “wrappers” to their HTTP APIs (such as a search function) and visual components to work with geographical entities. The latter often include general-purpose elements (such as buttons, placemarks, context menus, etc.) that can be used independently from the main functionality of the API.

This Section will be dedicated to these two types of program toolkits:
  * Client “wrappers” that work with client-server APIs
  * Client libraries that contain visual components with which end users might interact.

To avoid being wordy, we will use the term “SDK” for the former and “UI libraries” for the latter.

**NB**: Strictly speaking, a UI library might either include a client-server API “wrapper” or not (i.e., just provide a “pure” API to some underlying system engine). In this Section, we will mostly talk about the first option as it is the most general case and the most challenging one in terms of API design. Most SDK development patterns we will discuss are also applicable to “pure” libraries.