### [API as a Product][api-product]

There are two important statements regarding APIs viewed as products.

  1. APIs are *proper products*, just like any other kind of software. You're “selling” them in the same manner, and all the principles of product management are fully applicable to them. It's quite doubtful you would be able to develop APIs well unless you conducted proper market research, learned customers' needs, and studied competitors, supply, and demand.

  2. Still, APIs are *quite special products*. You're selling the possibility to make some actions programmatically by writing code, and this fact puts some restrictions on product management.

To properly develop the API product, you must be able to answer exactly this question: why would your customers prefer making some actions programmatically? It's not an idle question: out of this book's author's experience, the product owners' lack of expertise in working with APIs exactly *is* the largest problem of API product development.

End users interact with your API indirectly, through applications built upon it by software engineers acting on behalf of some company (and sometimes there is more than one engineer in between you and an end user). From this point of view, the API's target audience resembles a Maslow-like pyramid:
  * users constitute the pyramid's base; they look for the fulfillment of their needs and don't think about technicalities;
  * business owners form a middle level; they match users' needs against technical capabilities declared by developers and build products;
  * developers make up the pyramid's apex; it is developers who work with APIs directly, and they decide which of the competing APIs to choose.

The obvious conclusion of this model is that you must advertise the advantages of your API to developers. They will select the technology, and business owners will translate the concept to end users. If former or acting developers manage the API product, they often tend to evaluate the API market competitiveness in this dimension only and mainly channel the product promotion efforts to the developers' auditory.

“Stop!” the mindful reader must yell at this moment. “The actual order of things is exactly the opposite!”
  * Developers are normally a hired workforce implementing the tasks set by business owners (and even if a developer implements a project of his own, they still choose an API that fits the project best, thus being an employer of themselves).
  * Business leaders don't set tasks out of their sense of style or code elegance; they need some functionality being implemented — one that is needed to solve their customers' problems.
  * Finally, customers don't care about the technical aspects of the solution; they choose the product they need and ask for some specific functionality implemented.

So it turns out that customers are at the apex of the pyramid: it is customers you need to convince they need not *any* cup of coffee, but a cup of coffee brewed using our API (interesting question: how will we convey the knowledge which API works under the hood, and why customers should pay their money for it!); then business owners will set the task to integrate the API, and developers will have no other choice but to implement it (which, by the way, means that investing into API's readability and consistency is not *that* important).

The truth, of course, lies somewhere in between. In some markets and subject areas, it is developers who make decisions (e.g., which framework to choose); in other markets and areas, it might be business owners or customers. It also depends on the competitiveness of the market: introducing a new frontend framework does not meet any resistance while developing, let's say, a new mobile operating system requires million-dollar investments into promotions and strategic partnerships.

Here and after, we will describe some “averaged” situations, meaning that all three pyramid levels are important: customers choosing the product which fits their needs best, business owners seeking quality guarantees and lower development costs, as well as software engineers caring about the API capabilities and the convenience of working with it.