### [The API Business Models][api-product-business-models]

Before we proceed to the API product management principles, let us draw your attention to the matter of profits that the API vendor company might extract from it. As we will demonstrate in the next chapters, this is not an idle question as it directly affects making product decisions and setting KPIs for the API team. In this chapter, we will enumerate the main API monetization models. [In brackets, we will provide examples of such models applicable to our coffee-machine API study.]

##### Developers = End Users

The easiest and the most understandable case is that of providing a service for developers, with no end users involved. First of all, we talk about software engineering tools: APIs of programming languages, frameworks, operating systems, UI libraries, game engines, etc. — general-purpose interfaces, in other words. [In our coffee API case, it means the following: we've developed a library for ordering a cup of coffee, possibly furnished with UI components, and now selling it to coffeeshop chains owners whoever willing to buy it to ease the development of their own applications.] In this case, the answer to the “why have an API” question is self-evident.

There is also a plethora of monetizing techniques; in fact, we're just talking about monetizing software for developers.

  1. The framework / library / platform might be paid per se, i.e., distributed under a commercial license. Nowadays such models are becoming less and less popular with the rise of free and open-source software but are still quite common.

  2. The API may be licensed under an open license with some restrictions that might be lifted by buying an extended license. It might be either functional limitations (an inability to publish the app in the app store or an incapacity to build the app in the production mode) or usage restrictions (for example, using the API for some purposes might be prohibited or an open license might be “contagious,” i.e., require publishing the derived code under the same license).

  3. The API itself might be free, but the API vendor might provide additional paid services (for example, consulting or integrating ones), or just sell the extended technical support.

  4. The API development might be sponsored (explicitly or implicitly) by the platform or operating system owners [in our coffee case — by the vendors of smart coffee machines] who are interested in providing a wide range of convenient tools for developers to work with the platform.

  5. Finally, by publishing the API under a free license, the API vendor might be attracting attention to other programming tools it makes to increase sales.

Remarkably, such APIs are probably the only “pure” case when developers choose the solution solely because of its clean design, elaborate documentation, thought-out use cases, etc. There are examples of copying the API design (which is the sincerest form of flattery, as we all know!) by other companies or even enthusiastic communities — that happened, for example, with the Java language API (an alternate implementation by Google) and the C# one (the Mono project) — or just borrowing apt solutions — as it happened with the concept of selecting DOM elements with CSS selectors, initially implemented in the *cssQuery* project, then adopted by *jQuery*, and after the latter became popular, incorporated as a part of the DOM standard itself.

##### API = the Main and/or the Only Access to the Service

This case is close to the previous one as developers again, not end users, are API consumers. The difference is that the API is not a product per se, but the service exposed via the API is. The purest examples are cloud platforms APIs like Amazon AWS or Braintree API. Some operations are possible through end-user interfaces, but generally speaking, the services are useless without APIs. [In our coffee example, imagine we are an operator of “cloud” coffee machines equipped with drone-powered delivery, and the API is the only mean of making an order.]

Usually, customers pay for the service usage, not for the API itself, though frequently the tariffs depend on the number of API calls.

##### API = a Partner Program

Many commercial services provide the access to their platforms for third-party developers to increase sales or attract additional audiences. Examples include the Google Books partner program, Skyscanner Travel APIs, and Uber API. [In our case study, it might be the following model: we are a large chain of coffee shops, and we encourage partners to sell our coffee through their websites or applications.] Such partnerships are fully commercial: partners monetize their own audience, and the API provider company yearns to get access to extended auditory and additional advertisement channels. As a rule, the API provider company pays for users reaching target goals and sets requirements for the integration performance level (for example, in a form of a minimum acceptable click-target ratio) to avoid misusing the API.

##### API = Additional Access to the Service

If a company possesses some unique expertise, usually in a form of some dataset that couldn't be easily gathered if needed, quite logically a demand for the API exposing this expertise arises. The most classical examples of such APIs are cartographical APIs: collecting detailed and precise geodata and keeping it up-to-date are extremely expensive, while a wide range of services would become much more useful if they featured an integrated map. [Our coffee example hardly matches this pattern as the data we accumulate — coffee machines locations, beverages types — is something useless in any other context but ordering a cup of coffee.]

This case is the most interesting one from the API developers' point of view as the existence of the API does really serve as a multiplier to the opportunities as the expertise owner could not physically develop all imaginable services utilizing the expertise but might help others to do it. Providing the API is a win-win: third-party services got their functionality improved, and the API provider got some profits.

Access to the API might be unconditionally paid. However, hybrid models are more common: the API is free until some threshold is reached, such as usage limits or constraints (for example, only non-commercial projects are allowed). Sometimes the API is provided for free with minimal restrictions to popularize the platform (for example, Apple Maps).

B2B services are a special case. As B2B Service providers benefit from offering diverse capabilities to partners, and conversely partners often require maximum flexibility to cover their specific needs, providing an API might be the optimal solution for both. Large companies have their own IT departments and more frequently need APIs to connect them to internal systems and integrate into business processes. Also, the API provider company itself might play the role of such a B2B customer if its own products are built on top of the API.

**NB**: we rather disapprove the practice of providing an external API merely as a byproduct of the internal one without making any changes to bring value to the market. The main problem with such APIs is that partners' interests are not taken into account, which leads to numerous problems:
  * The API doesn't cover integration use cases well:
      * internal customers employ quite a specific technological stack, and the API is poorly optimized to work with other programming languages / operating systems / frameworks;
      * for external customers, the learning curve will be pretty flat as they can't take a look at the source code or talk to the API developers directly, unlike internal customers that are much more familiar with the API concepts;
      * documentation often covers only some subset of use cases needed by internal customers;
      * the API services ecosystem which we will describe in “[The API Services Range](#api-product-range)” chapter usually doesn't exist.
  * Any resources spent are directed to covering internal customer needs first. It means the following:
      * API development plans are totally opaque to partners, and sometimes look just absurd with obvious problems being neglected for years;
      * technical support of external customers is financed on leftovers.

All those problems lead to having an external API that actually hurts the company's reputation, not improves it. You're providing a very bad service for a very critical and skeptical auditory. If you don't have a resource to develop the API as a product for external customers, better don't even start.

##### API = an Advertisement Site

In this case, we talk mostly about things like widgets and search engines as direct access to end users is a must to display commercials. The most typical examples of such APIs are advertisement networks APIs. However, mixed approaches do exist either — meaning that some API, usually a searching one, goes with commercial insets. [In our coffee example, it means that the offer searching function will start promoting paid results on the search results page.]

##### API = Self-Advertisement and Self-PR

If an API has neither explicit nor implicit monetization, it might still generate some income, increasing the company's brand awareness through displaying logos and other recognizable elements in partners' apps, either native (if the API goes with UI elements) or agreed-upon ones (if partners are obliged to embed specific branding in those places where the API functionality is used or the data acquired through API is displayed). The API provider company's goals in this case are either attracting users to the company's services or just increasing brand awareness in general. [In the case of our coffee example, let's imagine that our main business is something totally unrelated to the coffee machine APIs, like selling tires, and by providing the API we hope to increase brand recognition and get a reputation as an IT company.]

The target audiences for such self-promotion might also differ:
  * you might seek to increase brand awareness among end users (by embedding logos and links to your services on partner's websites and applications), and even build the brand exclusively through such integrations [for example if our coffee API provides coffeeshop ratings, and we're working hard on making consumers demand the coffeeshops to publish the ratings];
  * you might concentrate efforts on increasing awareness among business owners [for example, for partners integrating a coffee ordering widget on their websites to also pay attention to your tires catalog];
  * finally, you might provide APIs only to make developers know your company's name to increase their knowledge of your other products or just to improve your reputation as an employer (this activity is sometimes called “tech-PR”).

Additionally, we might talk about forming a community, i.e., a network of developers (or customers, or business owners) who are loyal to the product. The benefits of having such a community might be substantial: lowering the technical support costs, getting a convenient channel for publishing announcements regarding new services and new releases, and obtaining beta users for upcoming products.

##### API = a Feedback and UGC Tool

If a company possesses some big data, it might be useful to provide a public API for users to make corrections in the data or otherwise get involved in working with it. For example, cartographical API providers usually allow to post feedback or correct a mistake right on partners' websites and applications. [In the case of our coffee API, we might be collecting feedback to improve the service, both passively through building coffeeshops ratings or actively through contacting business owners to convey users' requests or through finding new coffee shops that are still not integrated with the platform.]

##### Terraforming

Finally, the most altruistic approach to API product development is providing it free of charge (or as an open source and open data project) just to change the landscape. If today nobody's willing to pay for the API, we might invest in popularizing the functionality hoping to find commercial niches later (in any of the abovementioned formats) or to increase the significance and usefulness of the API integrations for end users (and therefore the readiness of the partners to pay for the API). [In the case of our coffee example, imagine a coffee machine maker that starts providing APIs for free aiming to make having an API a “must” for every coffee machine vendor thus allowing for the development of commercial API-based services in the future.]

##### Gray Zones

One additional source of income for the API provider is the analysis of the requests that end users make. In other words — collecting and re-selling some user data. You must be aware that the difference between acceptable data collecting (such as aggregating search requests to understand trends or finding promising locations for opening a coffee shop) and unacceptable ones are quite vague, and tends to vary in time and space (e.g., some actions might be totally legal at the one side of the state border, and totally illegal at the other side), so making a decision of monetizing the API with it should be carried out with extreme caution.

#### The API-First Approach

Last several years we see the trend of providing some functionality as an API (i.e., as a product for developers) instead of developing the service for end users. This approach, dubbed “API-first,” reflects the growing specialization in the IT world: developing APIs becomes a separate area of expertise that businesses are ready to outsource instead of spending resources to develop internal APIs for their applications by the in-house IT department. However, this approach is not universally accepted (yet), and you should keep in mind the factors that affect the decision of launching a service in the API-first paradigm:

  1. The target market must be sufficiently heated up: there must be companies there that possess enough resources to develop services atop third-party APIs and pay for it (unless your aim is terraforming).

  2. The quality of the service must not suffer if the service is provided only through the API.

  3. You must really possess expertise in API development; otherwise, there are high chances to make too many design mistakes.

  Sometimes providing APIs is a method to “probe the ground,” i.e., to evaluate the market and decide whether it's worth having a full-scale user service there. (We rather condemn this practice as it inevitably leads to discontinuing the API or limiting its functionality, either because the market turns out to be not as profitable as expected, or because the API eventually becomes a competitor to the main service.)