### [On the HTTP API Concept and Terminology][http-api-concepts]

The problem of designing HTTP APIs is unfortunately one of the most “holywar”-inspiring issues. On one hand, it is one of the most popular technologies but, on the other hand, it is quite complex and difficult to comprehend due to the large and fragmented standard split into many RFCs. As a result, the HTTP specification is doomed to be poorly understood and imperfectly interpreted by millions of software engineers and thousands of textbook writers. Therefore, before proceeding to the useful part of this Section, we must clarify exactly what we are going to discuss.

It has somehow happened that the entire modern network stack used for developing client-server APIs has been unified in two important points. One of them is the Internet Protocol Suite, which comprises the IP protocol as a base and an additional layer on top of it in the form of either the TCP or UDP protocol. Today, alternatives to the TCP/IP stack are used for a very limited subset of engineering tasks.

However, from a practical standpoint, there is a significant inconvenience that makes using raw TCP/IP protocols much less practical. They operate over IP addresses which are poorly suited for organizing distributed systems:
  * Firstly, humans are not adept at remembering IP addresses and prefer readable names
  * Secondly, an IP address is a technical entity bound to a specific network node while developers require the ability to add or modify nodes without having to modify the code of their applications.

The domain name system, which allows for assigning human-readable aliases to IP addresses, has proved to be a convenient abstraction with almost universal adoption. Introducing domain names necessitated the development of new protocols at a higher level than TCP/IP. For text (hypertext) data this protocol happened to be [HTTP 0.9](https://www.w3.org/Protocols/HTTP/AsImplemented.html) developed by Tim Berners-Lee and published in 1991. Besides enabling the use of network node names, HTTP also provided another useful abstraction: assigning separate addresses to endpoints working on the same network node.

Initially, the protocol was very simple and merely described a method of retrieving a document by establishing a TCP/IP connection to the server and passing a string in the `GET document_address` format. Subsequently, the protocol was enhanced by the URL standard for document addresses. After that, the protocol evolved rapidly: new verbs, response statuses, headers, data types, and other features emerged in a short time.

HTTP was developed to transfer hypertext which poorly fits for developing program interfaces. However, loose HTML quickly evolved into strict and machine-readable XML, which became one of the most widespread standards for describing API calls. Starting from the 2000s, XML was gradually replaced by much simpler and interoperable JSON. Today, when we talk about HTTP APIs, we usually refer to interfaces for transmitting data and executing remote calls in JSON format over the HTTP protocol.

On one hand, HTTP was a simple and easily understandable protocol to make arbitrary calls to remote servers using their domain names. On the other hand, it quickly gained a wide range of extensions beyond its base functionality. Eventually, HTTP became another “attractor” where all the network technology stacks converge. Most API calls within TCP/IP networks are made through the HTTP protocol. However, unlike the TCP/IP case, it is each developer's own choice which parts of the functionality provided by the HTTP protocol and its numerous extensions they are going to use. For example, gRPC and GraphQL work on top of HTTP but employ a limited subset of its capabilities.

However, the term “HTTP API” is not always a synonym for “any API that utilizes the HTTP protocol.” When we refer to HTTP APIs, we *rather* imply it is used not as a third additional quasi-transport layer protocol (as it happens in the case of gRPC and GraphQL) but as an application-level protocol, meaning its components (such as URL, headers, HTTP verbs, status codes, caching policies, etc.) are used according to their respective semantics. We also likely imply that some textual data format (JSON or XML) is used to describe procedure calls.

In this Section, we will discuss client-server APIs with the following properties:
  * The interaction protocol is HTTP version 1.1 or higher
  * The data format is JSON (excluding endpoints specifically designed to provide data in other formats, usually files)
  * The endpoints (resources) are identified by their URLs in accordance with the standard
  * The semantics of HTTP calls match the specification
  * None of the Web standards are intentionally violated.

We will refer to such APIs as “HTTP APIs” or “JSON-over-HTTP APIs.” We understand that this is a loose interpretation of the term, but we prefer to live with that rather than using the phrase “JSON-over-HTTP endpoints utilizing the semantics described in the HTTP and URL standards” each time.